immm 


Jaiftt  t « 


SY 


NOBLER  U  PRENTIS 
REVISED     EDITION 


o\' 


oV^ 


HISTORY  is  a  revelation,  not  a  recital.  It  is  more  than  a 
random  record  of  facts,  for  facts  are  not  derelicts 
floating  hither  and  thither  on  an  unknown  sea.  They  are 
lig-ht-houses  for  the  enlightenment  and  guidance  of  intelligent 
voyagers.  And  he  who  throws  facts  together  as  one  throws  dice 
is  not  a  historian — he  is  a  juggler  in  events,  for  so  great  an 
authority  as  Macaulay  has  said  that  "facts  are  the  mere  dross 
of  history."  "History  is  a  divine  poem,"  said  President  Garfield, 
"in  which  every  nation  is  a  canto  and  every  man  a  word." 
Only  those,  therefore,  who  regard  facts  as  milestones  on  the 
road  of  progress  are  capable  of  writing  history.  "The  historian," 
said  Schlegel,  "is  a  prophet  looking  backwards." 

Noble  L.  Prentis  was  such  a  seer.  He  gathered  facts,  not 
as  a  child  gathers  trinkets,  but  as  a  scientist  gathers  data.  He 
saw  significance,  purpose  and  design,  in  evehts.  He  was  an 
interpreter  as  well  as  collator  of  facts,  and  this  work  which 
bears  his  name  has  soul  in  it,  as  well  as  facts  in  it — without 
which  an  alleged  history  is  not  worth  the  reading. 

I  knew  this  divinely  gifted  man  intimately.  A  great  soul  was 
his.  He  was,  perhaps,  the  most  popular  and  prolific  writer  who 
ever  touched  pen  to  paper  in  this  State.  No  subject  was 
commonplace  under  the  magic  of  his  facile  and  versatile  pen. 
His  prodigious  memory  was  a  storehouse  of  history,  and  his 
analytical  mind  and  great  soul  enabled  him  to  place  proper  value 
upon  occurrences,  and  to  preserve  in  this  concrete  form  the 
salient  and  essential  facts  in  the  evolution  of  the  State.  "Into 
this  garner  a  great  and  good  man  has  put  the  ripened  harvest  of 
life  rich  in  experience,  in  knowledge  and  in  wisdom,  and  left  it 
as  a  dower  gf  wealth  to  the  schools  of  Kansas. 

Executive  Office,  May  l-'OS.-  E.  W.  HOCH. 


^.*7<^^  ^  /2l,_2*i, 


A  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS 


\ 

by" 
NOBLE  L.  PRENTIS 


Edited  and  Eevised 

BY 

HENRIETTA  V.  EACE,  A.M., 

PROFESSOR  OF  EDUCATION, 
/  SOUTHWESTERN  COLLEGE. 


Published  by  Caroline  Prentis, 

TOPEKA,    KANSAS, 

1909 


Copyright,  1909 

BY 

CAKOLINE  PEENTIS 


Cla.A,   244  2  21 
JUL    28    1909 

1^         .ir.v.   , 


PREFACE. 


The  attempt  has  been  made,  in  preparing  this  volume,  to  give, 
within  a  convenient  compass,  the  most  interesting  and  material 
occurrences  and  events  in  the  history  of  the  rise  of  a  great  Free 
State  from  a  wilderness.  Harrowing  details  and  discreditable 
happenings  have  been  purposely  omitted. 

The  story  has  been  told  as  a  record  of  courage,  steadfastness,  and 
increasing  devotion  to  the  principles  of  human  freedom  and  national 
union. 

No  attempt  has  been  made  to  ''write  down"  to  the  supposed 
intellectual  capacity  of  children.  Students  old  enough  to  enter 
upon  the  study  of  the  history  of  an  American  State,  it  is  believed, 
will  find  all  the  statements  and  conclusions  comprehensible. 

It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  reader  or  student  will  consider  this 
small  and  necessarily  limited  history  of  one  State,  as  a  help  and 
introduction  to  the  study  of  the  history  of  the  American  Union, 
which  should  be  the  pride  and  privilege  of  every  American  citizen 
in  youth  and  age. 

NOBLE  L.  PRENTIS. 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE. 

The  Prentis  History  of  Kansas  as  presented  has  been  thoroughly 
revised  and  carefully  edited.  That  which  was  valuable  in  the 
earlier  editions  has  been  retained  and  much  new  material  has  been 
added. 

The  book  has  been  worked  over  with  the  purpose  in  view  of 
rendering  it  more  teachable  and  of  making  the  story  of  the  State 
in  all  its  richness  of  deep, interest  to  the  you"ng  student.  To  this 
end,  the  subject  matter  hks  been  carefully  outlined,  events  have 

.      f         5  ! 


Q  PREFACE. 

been  arranged  with  the  most  significant  in  the  foreground,  and 
telling  scenes  have  been  vividly  described.  The  story  of  Coronado, 
the  life  of  the  Indian,  the  toil  of  the  missionary,  the  exciting  times 
of  the  struggle,  the  lonely  heroic  life  of  the  pioneer  homesteader 
on  the  prairie,  all  are  written  with  an  idea  of  bringing  to  the  mind 
of  the  student,  not  a  dry  array  of  facts  but  scenes  of  real  life. 
Foot  notes  judiciously  selected  give  interesting  events  and  lend 
color  and  tone. 

The  philosophy  of  history  is  carefully  worked  out  in  the  Terri- 
torial Period — ^beginning  with  the  development  of  slavery  in  the 
United  States  and  continuing  through  the  contest  in  Congress  to 
the  passage  of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Bill  which  was  made  to  get 
the  slavery  question  out  of  Congress  and  into  the  Territory.  The 
inevitable  result  follows  and  the  struggle  in  Kansas  begins.  The 
Topeka  movement  is  organized  and  runs  for  a  time  side  by  side 
with  the  Territorial  government  until  final  victory  comes  in  the 
triumph  of  the  Free  State  Party. 

The  State  and  Territorial  periods  are  divided  into  administra- 
tions. This  is  done  to  show  events  in  their  relation  to  each  other 
and  to  reveal  the  different  periods  as  scenes  in  the  life  of  the 
State.  Yet  these  events  are  so  written  that  anyone  desiring  to 
study  certain  subjects,  for  instance,  <  The  Topeka  Movement,  The 
Development  of  the  People's  Party,  Prohibition  or  The  Work  of 
the  Women  of  Kansas,  may  follow  the  subject  through  the  admin- 
istrations without  difficulty. 

The  heroic  defense  of  the  State,  the  patriotic  service  of  the 
Kansas  soldier  in  the  Civil  War,  the  bravery  of  the  boys  who 
volunteered  in  the  Spanish-American  AVar,  are  subjects  that  are 
handled  so  as  to  develop  appreciation  and  patriotism. 

The  value  of  maps  in  the  study  of  history  has  long  been  acknowl- 
edged. The  maps  of  the  text  have  been  carefully  made.  Every 
place  mentioned  should  be  located  by  the  student. 

For  the  lower  grades,  the  stories  of  the  text  will  be  found  fasci- 
nating. Kansas  has  a  history  of  remarkable  interest  and  great 
value  in  both  her  own  and  national  life.  The  children  of  so 
notable  a  State  should  know  of  its  greatness,  and  be  inspired  by 
the  heroes  who  builded  even  better  than  they  knew. 


PEEFACE.  7 

With  a  deep  sense  of  gratitude  to  Miss  Eaee  for  her  intelligent, 
conscientious  and  earnest  work  in  the  thorough  revision  of  the 
text,  and  with  sincere  appreciation  of  all  kindly  criticisms  and 
words  of  commendation,  the  publisher  sends  out  this  new  edition, 
believing  that  a  generous  reception  awaits  it.  A  love  for  Kansas 
History  on  the  part  of  the  children  and  youth  of  the  State  which 
Mr.'Prentis  loved  is  reward  suflS.eient  for  the  writer. 

CAEOLINE  PEENTIS. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

Kansas  Historical  Collection  (Volumes  I  to  X). 

Eeport  of  United  States  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  Volume  XIV. 

Kansas — Spring. 

History  of  Eeady  Eeference — Earned. 

The  Annals  of  Kansas — Wilder. 

History  of  Kansas — Andreas. 

United  States  History — Fiske. 

The  Kansas  Conflict — Eobinson, 

Kansas,  Its  Interior  and  Exterior  Life — Mrs.  Eobinson.  , 

The  Eescue  of  Kansas  from  Slavery — Dr.  Brown. 

Kansas  1857— T.  H.  Gladstone. 

The  Conquest  of  Kansas — W.  A.  Phillips. 

Geary  and  Kansas — John  H.  Gihon. 

Kansas  and  Nebraska  Hand-Book — Parker. 

Wars  of  the  Western  Border — Brewerton. 

The  Santa  Fe  Trail— Col.  Inman. 

Commerce  of  the  Prairie — Gregg. 

Kansas  Territorial  Governors — Connelley. 

Charles  Eobinson — Blackmar. 

Kansas  and  Nebraska — Edward  Everett  Hale. 

James  Henry  I^ane — Connelley. 

John  Brown — Connelley. 

Kansas  in  Literature  (Volumes  I  and  II) — Carruth. 

Poems  of  Iroijquil — Ware. 

Stratagems  and  Spoils — White. 

In  Old  Quivera — Margaret  Hill  McCarter. 

Early  Travels   and   Adventures   in   America   and   Asia — Henry   M. 

Stanley. 
Indian  Sketches — Irving. 


CONTENTS. 

PAGE. 

INTKODUCTORY. 

Chapter  I.     Natural  Kansas 11 

THE  PEEIOD  OF  EXPLOEATION. 

Chapter  II.     Spanish  Exploration  .- 16 

III.  French  Exploration 24 

IV.  American   Exploration 31 

V.  Some  Famous  Trails 42 

THE  INDIAN  COUNTEY. 

Chapter  VI.     The  Country  Set  Apart  for  the  Indians.  51 

VII.     Indian  Tribes  and  Customs 54 

VIJI.     Missions,  Trading  Posts  and  Forts.  ...  59 

THE  TEEEITOEIAL  PEEIOD. 

review  of  the  situation. 
Chapter  IX.     The     Organic     Act.  —  The     Kansas-Ne- 
braska Bill ^  67 

X.     Kansas    Territory : . . .  71 

the    struggle   in    KANSAS. 

XL     Governor  Eeeder  's  Administration 79 


THE  reign   of  violence. 

XII.  Governor  Shannon's  Administration...  88 

XIII.  Governor  Geary's  Administration 104 

XIV.  Governor  Walker's  Administration.  ..  .109 

XV.  Governor  Denver's  Administration 116 

making  the  constitution. 

XVI.  Governor  Medary's  Administration.  ..  .121 

THE  PERIOD  OF  STATEHOOD. 

STATE   construction. 

Chapter  XVII.     Governor    Robinson's    Administration, 

1861-1863  141 

XVIIf.     Governor     Carney's     Administration, 

1863-1865   .151 

XIX.     Governor     Crawford's     Administration, 

1865-1869  172 


CONTENTS.  9 

THE  PEEIOD  OF  STATEHOOD— Continued. 

YEARS   OF   GREAT  IMMIGRATION.  PAGE. 

XX.  Governor  Harvey ^s  Administration,  1869- 

1873    183 

XXI.  Governor  Osborn's  Administration,  1873- 

.  1877   189 

XXII.  Governor    Anthony's    Administration, 

1877-1879  198 

economic  growth. 

XXIII.  Governor  St.  John's  Administration, 

1879-1883  202 

XXIV.  Governor  Glick's  Administkation,  1883- 

1885   210 

XXV.  Governor      Martin's      Administration, 

1885-1889  215 

political  changes. 

XXVI.  Governor  Humphrey's  Administration, 

1889-1893   224 

XXVII.  Governor     Lewelling's     Administra- 

tion, 1893-1895 241 

XXVIII.  Governor  Morrill's  Administration, 

1895-1897   250 

XXIX.  Governor      Leedy's      Administration, 

1897-1899   256 

industrial  development. 

XXX.  Governor     Stanley's     Administration, 

1899-1903 265 

XXXI.  Governor     Bailey's     Administration, 

1903-1905   275 

XXXII.  Governor      Hoch's      Administration, 

1905-1909   281 

XXXIII.  Governor     Stubbs'    Administration, 

1909   288 

XXXIV.  Industrial  Kansas 292 

XXXV.  Educational    Institutions 297 

XXXVI.  Kansas   Literature 300 

APPENDIX. 

Description  of  Counties 321 

Organic  Act 346 

Admission  Into  the  Union .352 

Constitution 356 

Kansas  Territorial  Officers,  1854-1861 383 

State  Officers  of  Kansas,  1861-1909 384 


A  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

INTRODUCTORY. 

CHAPTER  I. 

NATUEAL   KANSAS. 

1.  Description. — Kansas  has  been  described  by  geolo- 
gists as  a  part  of  the  great  plain  stretching  from  the 
Mississippi  River  on  the  east  to  the  Rocky  Mountains  on 
the  west.  It  is  408  miles  long  by  208  miles  wide  and 
should  be  looked  upon  as  a  block,  in  the  plain,  constitut- 
ing an  essential  part  of  it  and  not  specially  different 
from  other  portions  lying  on  either  side  of  it.  The  aver- 
age altitude  is  2,000  feet  above  the  sea  lev^l.  The  altitude 
rises  appro:5^imately  from  750  feet  on  the  eastern  boundary 
to  about  4,000  feet  on  the  extreme  western  boundary. 
The  lowest  point  in  the  state  is  in  the  southeastern  part 
at  Coffeyville  in  Montgomery  county.  It  is  734  feet  above 
the  sea  level.  At  the  mouth  of  the  Kansas  River  in 
Kansas  City  the  elevation  is  750  feet.  The  highest  point 
in  the  state  is  in  the  northwestern  part  at  Kanorado/in 
Sherman  county,  where  the  altitude  is  3,906-  feet.  The 
general  effect  is  that  of  an  immense  prairi^,  rising  west- 
ward into  a  very  high  prairie,  but  the  appearance  is  not 
that  of  a  flat  and  boundless  plain.  The  waters  of  the 
state,  which  generally  flow  eastward,  have  an  average 
fall  for  the  whole  state  of  nearly  eight  feet  to  the  mile. 

11 


12 


HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 


Although  the  surface  is  a  great  plain  sloping  eastward, 
its  minute  topography  is  often  rugged  and  varied ;  valleys 
200  feet  deep,  bluffs  and  mounds  with  precipitous  walls 
300  feet  high;  overhanging  rocky  ledges  and  remnants 
of  cataracts  and  falls  in  numerous  streams  giving  a 
variety  of  scenery,  are  to  be  observed  all  over  the  eastern 


Scene   on    the    Marmaton,    Bourbon   County,    Kansas. 

part  of  the  state,  and  to  even  a  greater  extent  in  some 
portions  of  the  west. 

2.  Story  of  Kansas  Nature  in  Its  Literature. — All  the 
natural  features  of  this  great  rectangle;  all  the  varying 
aspects  of  the  earth,  as  touched  by  the  shaping  hands 
of  the  seasons;  all  the  shifting  panorama  of  the  skies;  all 


NATURAL  KANSAS.  13 

the  myriad  voices  of  the  winds;  the  shine  of  shallow, 
wide  and  wandering  streams;  the  fringing  trees  that 
watch  the  waters  as  they  pass ;  the  lovely  charm  of  each 
rocky  promontory  that  looks  out  upon  the  sea  of  grass, 
all  these  have  proved  to  be  the  inspiring  and  informing 
spirit  of  Kansas  literature. 

In  all  that  has  been  written  in  prose  and  verse  since 
first  the  wide  wilderness  heard  the  cautious  but  advanc- 
ing feet  of  the  pioneer,  the  story  of  Kansas  nature  has 
been  told.  Readers  of  books  written  in  Kansas  find  im- 
pressions made  on  mind  and  heart,  by  sun  and  cloud,  by 
drouth  and  rain,  by  calm  and  storm,  and  witness  the 
procession  of  the  days  of  the  Kansas  year.  Days  when, 
as  one  has  written,  "the  broad,  wintry  landscape  is 
flooded  with  that  indescribable  splendor  that  never  was 
on  sea  or  shore — a  purple  silken  softness  that  half  veils, 
half  discloses  the  alien  horizon,  the  vast  curves  of  the 
remote  river,  the  transient  architecture  of  the  clouds — 
and  days  without  clouds  and  nights  without  dew,  when 
the  effulgent  sun  floods  the  dome  with  fierce  and  blinding 
radiance,  days  of  glittering  leaves  and  burnished  blades 
of  corn,  days  when  the  transparent  air,  purged  of  all 
earthly  exhalation  and  alloy,  seems  like  a  pure,  powerful 
lens,  revealing  a  remoter  horizon  and  a  profounder  sky." 


Review  Questions. — What  are  the  dimensions  of  the  State  of 
Kansas? — What  is  the  average  altitude? — Locate  the  highest  and 
lowest  points. — Make  a  relief  map  of  the  State,  showing  the  river 
valleys,  the  general  slope  of  the  land  and  the  highest  and  lowest 
points. — How  has  Kansas  nature  affected  its  literature? — Make  col- 
lections of  poetry  and  prose  written  in  Kansas  and  notice  the  nature 
touches. 


PERIOD   OF   EXPLORATION. 

Quivira — Kansas. 

In  that  half-forgotten   era. 
With  the  avarice  of  old, 
Seeking  cities  he  was  told 
Had  been  paved  with  yellow  gold, 
In  the  Kingdom  of  Quivira — 

Came  the  restless  Coronado 

To  the  open  Kansas  plain. 

With  his  knights  from  sunny  Spain; 

In  an  effort  that,  though  vain. 

Thrilled   with   boldness    and   bravado. 

League    by    league,    in    aimless    marching, 
Knowing  scarcely  where  or  why, 
Crossed  they  uplands  drear  and  dry, 
That   an  unprotected  sky 
Had  for  centuries  been  parching. 

But   their  expectations   eager  . 

Found  instead  of  fruitful  lands. 

Shallow  streams   and  shifting  sands. 

Where  the  buffalo  in  bands 

Roamed    o'er    deserts    dry    and    meager. 

Back  to  scenes  more  trite,  yet  tragic. 
Marched    the    knights    with    armor 'd    steeds; 
Not  for  them  the  quiet  deeds; 
Not  for  them  to  sow  the  seeds 
From  which  empires  grow  like  magic. 
14 


NATUEAL  KANSAS.  15 

Never  land  so  hunger-stricken 
Could  a  Latin  race  re-mold; 
They  could  conquer  heat  or  cold — 
Die  for  glory  or  for  gold — 
But  not  make  a  desert  quicken. 

Thus  Quivira  was  forsaken; 
And  the  world  forgot  thie  place    . 
Through  the  lapse  of  time  and  space. 
Then  the  blue-eyed  Saxon  race 
Came  and  bade  the  desert  waken. 

— Eugene  Ware. 


CHAPTER  II. 

SPANISH    EXPLORATION. 

3.  Narvaez  Expedition — Gabeca  de  Vaca. — Cabeca  de 
Vaca^  in  1536  was  probably  the  first  European  to  traverse 
the  Western  plains.  He  lived  in  Seville,  Spain,  where 
Narvaez  was  raising  his  forces  for  the  colonization  of 
Florida,  and  being  a  friend  of  the  king,  received  the 
appointment  of  royal  treasurer  and  high  sheriff  of  the 
enterprise.  The  expedition  started  in  1527  with  four 
ships  and  four  hundred  men  and  landed  in  the  south- 
eastern part  of  North  America.  In  the  wilds  of  the  newly 
discovered  country  the  army  became  scattered  and  de- 
moralized. When  the  boats  in  which  a  remnant  had 
taken  refuge  were  wrecked  off  the  coast  of  Texas,  none 
escaped  except  Cabeca  de  Vaca,  two  other  Spaniards 
and  a  negro.  These  were  cast  ashore  on  one  of  the  islands 
of  Matagorda  Bay.  They  were  taken  prisoners  by  the 
Indians,  who  had  never  seen  white  or  black  men  before 
and  who  regarded  their  captives  as  supernatural  beings. 
For  six  years  they  were  carried  from  tribe  to  tribe. 
Finally  Cabeca  and  his  party  secured  their  freedom,  and 
for  three  more  years  wandered  over  the  plains  trading 
with  the  Indians  and  exploring  the  country.  It  is  thought 
by  some  historians  that  Cabeca  de  Vaca  came  upon  the 
Indian  trail,  later  called  the  Santa  Fe,  and  followed  it  far 

1.     Pronounced,    ka-ba'-sa-da-va'-ka. 

16 


SPANISH  EXPLORATION. 


17 


into  New  Mexico.  In  1536,  he  reached  the  Spanish  set- 
tlements on  the  Pacific.  The  importance  of  this  expedi- 
tion to  Kansas  history  lies  in  its  effect.  On  his  return 
to  Spain,  Cabeca  painted  in  such  glowing  colors  the 
richness  of  the  country  which  he  had  visited  that  the 


Map  of  Coronado's  Expedition. 


king  determined  to  send  another  expedition  and  Coro- 
nado's expedition  was  organized.^ 


2.     Buckingham    Smith    while   secretary   of   the   American    Legation 
[adrid  discovered  the  "Narrative  of  Cabeca  de  Vaca"  in  the  archives 


at 
Madrid  discovered  the  "Narrative  of  Cabeca  de  Vaca"  in  the  archives  of 
State,  where  it  had  Iain  for  nearly  three  hundred  years,  unread  and  forgot- 
ten. As  a  story  of  suffering,  this  old  manuscript,  yellow  with  age,  and 
covered  with  the  dust  of  the  centuries,  has  no  parallel  in  the  history  of 
exploration. 


18 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 
COEONADO'S  EXPEDITION. 


4.  From  Compostela  to  the  Rio  Grande.— Francisco 
Vasquez  de  Coronado  led  an  exploring  party  into  Kansas 
in  1541.  Indian  traders  from  the  country  north  of 
Mexico  had  brought  to  the  capital  city  large  amounts  of 
gold  and  silver;  Cabeca  de  Vaca  on  his  return  from  the 


Coronado   Crossing   the   Territory   in   1541. 

Narvaez  expedition  had  told  of  large  and  wealthy  villages 
in  the  territory  which  he  had  traversed ;  Mexico  and  Peru 
had  yielded  great  treasure  to  Spanish  adventurers.  Hop- 
ing to  be  rewarded  in  like  manner,  Mendoza,  viceroy  of 
Mexico,  raised  an  army  for  the  exploration  of  the  "seven 


SPANISH  EXPLORATION.  19 

cities  of  Cibola  and  the  unknown  regions  to  the  north," 
and  placed  Coronado  in  command. 

The  army  consisted  of  300  mounted  Spaniards,  and 
1,000  friendly  Indians  and  servants,  provided  with  large 
supplies  of  arms,  horses,  cattle  and  sheep. 

In  February,  1540,  the  expedition  started  from  Com- 
postela.  They  traversed  the  Pacific  coast  through  Culia- 
can  to  the  Bio  Sonora.  Then  striking  into  the  interior 
near  the  source  of  that  river  they  penetrated  the  moun- 
tains and  came  in  sight  of  one  of  the  seven  famed  cities 
of  Cibola,  Tiguex,  a  flat-roofed  Pueblo  village.  The 
Spaniards  assaulted  and  captured  the  village,  securing 
much  needed  provisions  of  corn,  beans,  fowl  and  salt.^ 

The  winter  camp  was  made  at  Tiguex  on  the  Rio 
Grande,  in  New  Mexico,  near  the  present  site  of  Ber- 
nalillo. The  winter  was  unusually  severe ;  the  Rio 
Grande  was  frozen  over  so  that  it  could  be  crossed  on 
the  ice  by  mounted  men.  The  natives  were  unfriendly, 
food  became  scarce,  the  army  discouraged,  and  no  gold 


3.     From  au  old  book  of  1670. 

"Next  to  Mexico  is  Quivira,  which  is  feated  on  the  moft  weftern  part 
of  America,  over  againft  Tartary,  from  whence  probably  the  inhabitants 
firft  came  into  this  New  World,  that  fide  of  the  country  being  moft 
populous,  and  the  people  living  much  after  the  manner  of  the  Tartars, 
following  the  Seafons  of  the  Year  for  the  Pafturage  of  their  Cattel  ;  that 
fide  of  America  being  full  of  Herbage,  and  enjoying  a  temperate  Air. 
The  People  defire  glafs  more  than  Gold.  Their  chief  Riches  are  their 
Kine,  which  are  Meat,  Drink,  Cloth,  Houfes  and  Utensils  to  them  :  for 
their  Hides  yield  them  Houfes  ;  their  Bones,  Bodkins  :  their  Hair,  thread  ; 
their  Sinews,  Ropes ;  their  Horns,  Maws,  and  Bladders.  Vessels ;  their 
Dung,  Fire ;  their  Calves,  Skins,  Budgets  to  draw  and  keep  water  in  ; 
their  Blood,  Drink  ;  their  Flesh,  Meat,  etc. 

"In  Quivira  there  are  but  two  Provinces  that  are  known,  Cibola  and 
Nova  Albion,  fo  Named  by  Sir  Francis  Drake,  when  he  compaffed  the 
World.  It  abounds  with  Fruits,  pleafant  to  both  ey(>  and  palate.  The 
people  are  given  to  Hofpitality,  but  withall,  to  Wich-craft,  and  worfhip- 
ping  of  Devils." — Kansas  Historical   Collection. 


30  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

or  silver  had  yet  been  found.     Still  Coronado  was  un- 
daunted.* 

5.  From  the  Rio  Grande  to  Quivira. — The  Indians, 
weary  of  the  troublesome  visitors,  employed  strategy  to 
get  rid  of  them.  A  Mississippi  Indian  captive  of  the 
Pueblos,  for  the  price  of  freedom  told  Coronado  that  to 
the  northeast  lay  the  cities  of  Quivira  and  that  there  gold 
could  be  found  in  abundance.  This  Indian,  because  he 
resembled  the  people  of  the  Balkan,  was  called  "the 
Turk."  Eagerly  the  Spaniards  accepted  his  story,  and 
taking  him  as  guide,  left  the  Rio  Grande  and  traveled 
toward  the  northeast  to  the  Rio  Pecos.  Crossing  on  a 
hurriedly  constructed  bridge,  they  traveled,  according  to 
the  record  of  Coronado  and  Jarmarillo,  who  was  a  dis- 
tinguished member  of  the  expedition,  thirty-seven  days 
to  the  east  and  southeast.  Here  "the  Turk"  was  accused 
of  deceit  by  Isopete,  an  Indian  belonging  to  a  neighboring 
tribe  of  the  Quiviras.  Isopete  declared  that  Quivira  lay 
to  the  north.  When  it  was  found  that  their  guide  had 
been  leading  them  into  desert  places  where  they  would 
perish  for  food,  "the  Turk"  was  put  in  chains  and  later 
strangled. 

Under  Isopete 's^  guidance  thirty-six  of  the  most  reso- 

4.  Several  interesting  relics  supposed  to  have  been  left  by  Coronado's 
men,  are  in  the  Kansas  Historical  Collection.  From  a  mound  near 
Lindsborg  Professor  J.  A.  Udden  of  Bethany  College  unearthed  a  fragment 
of  Spanish  chain  mail,  believed  to  be  a  part  of  the  armor  of  one  of 
Coronado's  men.  W.  E.  Richey  of  Harveyville  has  given  to  the  State  a 
Spanish  sword  which  was  found  in  Finney  County  near  the  head  waters 
of  the  Pawnee.     It  bears  on  its  blade  : 

Ne  Me  Snques  Sin  Razon  ; 

Ne  Me  Enbaincs  Sin  Honor. 
Translated    this    reads,    "Draw    me    not    without    reason ;    sheath    me   not 
without  honor."     Near  the  hilt  is  the  name  Juan  Gallego  in  script  letters. 
Gallego  was  one  of  Coronado's  most  distinguished  officers. 

5.  Isopete  is  pronounced  I-so-pe'-te. 


SPANISH  EXPLORATION. 


21 


Chain  Mail. 


lute  turned  northward,  and  came  in  thirty  days  to  the 

Arkansas  river,  where  the  Santa  Fe  trail  crosses  it  not  far 

from  the  present  site  of  Dodge  City. 

This    was    on    St.    Peter's    and    St. 

Paul's  day;  so  they  named  the  river 

St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul.     Following 

the  river  in  a  northeastern  direction 

for  eighty  miles,  they  met  a  Quivira 

hunting  party  on  the  site  of  Great 

Bend,  and  going  across  country^  they 

came  to  Quivira^  itself,  a  group  of 

Indian    villages    located    along    the 

valleys     of    the     Smoky    Hill     and 

Kansas    rivers.      Coronado    and    his 

men   went   from   village   to   village, 

which  extended  probably  as  far  as  McDowell's  Creek. 

At  the  farthest  northeastern  point  which  they  reached 

they   erected   a   cross   with  this   inscription,   "Francisco 

Vasquez    de    Coronado,    commander    of    an    expedition, 

arrived  at  this  place.  "^ 

The  long  search  was  ended.  Quivira  was  found,  but 
no  gold,  silver  or  precious  stones  were  there,  and 
Coronado,  ignorant  of  the  greatness  of  his  discovery, 
returned  disheartened  to  Mexico,  where  the  viceroy  re- 
ceived him  in  silent  disapproval.^ 

6.  Near  Lindsborg  the  iron  part  of  a  Spanish  bridle  and  a  bar  of 
lead  with  a  Spanish  brand  on  it  were  found  in  the  Quivira  locality. 

7.  The  Quiviran  Indians  were  Pawnees. 

8.  The  Cibola  cities  were  found  to  be  but  pueblos  in  Arizona  and  New 
Mexico. 

Monuments  have  been  erected  in  Geary,  Dickinson,  Riley  and  Wabaun- 
see Counties,  to  commemorate  the  Spanish  explorations  of  1841-42. 

9.  While  Coronado  was  making  these  long  marches  Desoto,  another 
Spanish  knight,  was  making  the  conquest  of  Florida.  After  his  death  and 
burial  in  the  Mississippi  River,  Moscoso  took  command  of  the  once  splen- 
did army,  now  worn  and  suffering  with  the  toil  of  conquest,  and  endeav- 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


6.  Father  Padilla.— After 
Coronado's  return  to  Mex- 
ico Father  Padilla,  one  of 
the  faithful  priests  of  the 
expedition,  went  back  to 
Quivira  as  a  missionary  to 
the  Indians.  He  was  killed 
by  the  Quivirans  because  he 
had  left  them,  and  was  on 
the  way  to  spread  the  Chris- 
tian religion  to  other  tribes. 
Padilla  ordered  the  few  who 
were  with  him  to  escape,  and 
kneeling,  met  the  savage  at- 
tack. Friendly  Indians  piled 
stones  above  his  grave,  mak- 
ing a  crude  monument, 
Avhich  still  standi  crowning 
the    summit    of   a    hill   near 

Council  Grove.  Thus  was  Christianity  brought  to  Kansas, 
and  Father  Padilla  was  our  first  martyr. ^^ 

7.  Onate's  Expedition. — Governor  Onate  of  New 
]\Iexico  with  eighty  men,  marched  in  search  of  Quivira 
in  1601.  He  joined  a  war  party  of  an  Indian  tribe  called 
the  Escansaques   (Es-can'sak),  who  were  enemies  of  the 

ored  to  lead  them  overland  to  the  Spanish  settlements  in  New  Mexico. 
They  came  so  far  west  that  thej'  saw  snow-capped  mountains.  Their 
entire  route  became  a  trail  of  fire  and  blood  for  Desoto  had  taught  the 
Indian  to  fear  and  hate  the  Spaniard.  At  last  in  despair  they  returned 
to  the  Mississippi  River.  It  is  thought  by  some  students  of  history  that 
Moscoso  entered  Kansas.  It  is  the  opinion  of  the  United  States  Bureau 
of  Ethnology  that  neither  Moscoso  nor  Cabeca  de  Vaca  ever  trod  Kansas 
soil. 

10.  Under  the  Spanish,  the  country  of  which  Kansas  is  a  part  was 
known  as  Florida. 


The    Padilla    Monument. 


SPANISH  EESTOEATION.  23 

Quiviras,  and  a  joint  attack  was  made  on  the  Quiviran 
villages.  The  Spaniards  and  their  allies  were  successful. 
To  crown  the  victory,  the  Escansaques  set  fire  to  the 
homes  of  the  Quiviras.  The  governor,  endeavoring  to 
stop  the  outrages,  aroused  the  enmity  of  the  Indians, 
and  they  turned  upon  the  Spaniards.  A  battle  ensued  in 
which  a  thousand  Indians  were  killed.  The  Spanish  loss 
was  insignificant,  but  soon  afterward  Onate  discontinued 
his  explorations  and  returned  to  New  Mexico. 

Review  Questions. — Name  two  Spanish  explorers  of  Kansas  and 
give  date  of  exploration. — Look  up  in  a  United  States  History  an 
account  of  the  Narvaez  Expedition. — What  was  the  most  important 
result  of  Cabeca  de  Vaca's  wanderings? — Give  four  causes  of  Coro- 
nado's  Expedition. — Trace  Coronado's  line  of  march. — Locate  Qui- 
vira. — What  proofs  have  we  of  Coronado's  being  in  Kansas? — Who 
was  the  first  Christian  martyr  in  Kansas? — What  country  did  Onate 
explore  and  why  did  he  discontinue  his  exploration? — What  was  the 
motive  of  Spanish  exploration? 


CHAPTER  III. 

FEENCH  EXPLOKATIONS. 

8.  Louisiana  Territory. — In  1682  La  Salle,  "the  great- 
est and  most  sagacious  of  explorers,"  sailed  down  the 
Mississippi  to  its  mouth.  On  April  9th  the  banner  of 
France  was  planted  at  the  southern  gateway,  and  La  Salle 
in  the  name  of  Louis  XIV,  King  of  France,  took  posses- 
sion of  the  Mississippi  and  all  lands  which  it  and  its 
tributaries  might  drain.  In  honor  of  the  king  this  vast 
territory  was  named  Louisiana.  It  extended  from  the 
Allegany  to  the  Rocky  Mountains,  and  from  the  Great 
Lakes  to  the  Gulf.  Kansas,  except  a  small  portion  of 
the  southwest  corner,  was  included  in  this  territory. 

9.  Exploration  of  M.  du  Tisne. — The  French  planted 
colonies  at  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi  in  1699  as  a 
result  of  La  Salle's  exploration.  In  1719  M.  de  Bienville, 
Governor  of  Louisiana,  sent  out  M.  du  Tisne,  who  ex- 
plored the  country  to  the  southwest,  coming  near  the 
eastern  boundary  of  what  is  now  Kansas,  and  possibly 
crossing  the  southeastern  corner.  The  Spaniards  of  New 
Mexico  hearing  of  Tisne 's  visit,  and  wishing  to  save  the 
territory  to  Spain,  sent  out  an  armed  caravan  under 
Villazur,^  which  came  into  the  Kansas  country  in  1720. 

1.  Villazur.  with  the  usual  Spanish  desire  for  display,  had  with  him 
many  pieces  of  silverware  such  as  silver  cups.  The  Indians  kept  these  for 
trinkets  and  showed  them  with  great  pride  to  the  French.  Villazur's 
party  rested  at  the  pueblo  village  of  Quartelejo.  The  massacre  occurred 
at  the  junction  of  the  PJatte  rivers  in  Lincoln  county,  Nebraska, 

24 


FEENCH  EXPLOEATIONS.  •  25 

The  Spanish  army  while  in  a  night  camp  was  attacked 
by  the  Indians  and  totally  destroyed.  Villazur  was 
killed. 

10.  Exploration  of  M.  de  Bourgmont.- — In  order  to 
hold  the  territory,  the  French  in  1723  built  a  fort  upon 
an  island  in  the  Missouri  river  near  the  mouth  of  the 
Osage  and  named  it  Fort  Orleans.  M.  de  Bourgmont^ 
was  put  in  command.  He  made  extensive  trips  along  the 
Kansas  river  and  its  tributaries.  The  first  trip  was  made 
into  the  Kansas  country  in  1724,  to  establish  commerce 
with  the  Indians  and  to  make  a  treaty  with  the  Padoucas. 
In  June  of  that  year,  Bourgmont 's  advance  detachment 
under  M.  de  St.  Ange  left  Fort  Orleans  and  went  by  water 
up  the  Missouri  river  to  the  Kansas.  Later  Bourgmont 
himself  started  overland.  He  was  accompanied  by  several 
Frenchmen  with  a  retinue  of  servants  and  a  hundred 
Missouris  commanded  by  eight  war  chiefs,  and  the  great 
chief  of  the  nation.  On  the  way,  he  induced  three  hun- 
dred Kanza  warriors  with  their  squaws  and  children, 
sixty-four  Osages  with  war  chiefs,  and  large  delegations 
of  the  Otoes  and  lowas  to  join  his  forces. 

They  traveled  in  columns.  The  French  commander 
and  Indian  chiefs  in  savage  array  led  the  advance,  fol- 
lowed by  Indians  on  horse  and  foot;  mules  loaded  with 
French  supplies,  Indian  dogs  dragging  lodge  poles,  and 
Indian  women  bearing  burdens  made  up  the  rear.    There 

2.  M.   is  the   abbreviation   for   Monsieur. 
Du  Tisne  is   pronounced,   du-tis-mi'. 

M.  Du  Tisne  started  from  Kaskaskia,   111. 
Bienville  is  pronounced.  be-Ong-vil. 

3.  Bourgmont  is  pronounced,  Boorg-mong. 


26  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

were  many  hardships  to  endure  en  route,  and  once  Bourg- 
mont,  stricken  with  fever,  was  obliged  to  return  to  Fort 
Orleans,  but  at  last,  in  October,  the  villages  of  the 
Padoucas  were  reached.  The  Indians  were  arranged  by 
tribes  in  a  great  circle,  with  M.  de  Bourgmont,  St.  Ange 
and  the  chief  of  the  Padoucas  in  prominence.  M.  de 
Bourgmont  addressed  them ;  the  chiefs  responded  in  turns 
and  then  they  smoked  the  pipe  of  peace.  The  party  re- 
turned to  Fort  Orleans  in  November.  Cannon  were  fired, 
flags  raised,  and  the  Te  Deum  was  sung  in  honor  of  the 
treaty. 

In  1725  the  Indians  totally  destroyed  Fort  Orleans  and 
massacred  the  entire  garrison.  The  atrocity  discouraged 
the  French,  and  from  1725  until  1803  Kansas  was  an 
almost  forgotten  country. 


28 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


Thomas    Jefferson. 


11.  Louisiana  Purchase. — In  1763,  at  the  close  of  the 
French  and  Indian  War,  France,  ceded  Canada  and  all 
her  possessions  east  of  the  Mississippi  River  except  New 
Orleans  to  England  and  all  west  of  the  Mississippi  River 
with  New  Orleans,'  to  Spain.  The 
term  Louisiana  was  at  this  time  ap- 
plied to  the  territory  between  the 
Mississippi  and  the  Rocky  Mountains. 
Spain's  hold  on  Louisiana  became  so 
weak,  as  the  years  passed,  that  for 
safety  she  retroceded  it  to  France  in 
1801  by  secret  treaty.  Napoleon  was 
then  First  Consul  of  France.  He  had 
hoped  to  build  a  magnificent  empire 
in  Louisiana.  His  plan  was  to  send  over  a  strong  army  of 
25,000  men,  accompanied  with  a  fleet  to  guard  the  coast, 
but  the  ever-watchful  England  thwarted  his  design. 
Napoleon  knew  that  he  must  take  possession  of  the  terri- 
tory and  hold  it  or  England  would  become  its  master,  and 
this  of  all  things  he  did  not  desire ;  he  was  pressed  on 
every  side  by  wars  and  political  combinations ;  he  saw 
clearly  that  to  divide  his  forces  in  order  to  undertake  a 
great  American  enterprise  would  endanger  his  power; 
and  lastly  he  needed  money  to  carry  on  his  campaigns. 

There  had  been  trouble  for  some  years  between  the 
colonists  and  Spanish  authorities  at  New  Orleans  in  re- 
gard to  the  commercial  rights  of  the  Lower  Mississippi. 
To  obviate  further  difficulties  Jefferson,  president  of  the 
United  States,  sent  a  request  to  Livingston,  American 
minister  to  France,  to  open  negotiations  for  the  purchase 
of  New   Orleans.     When  Napoleon  heard  the   message, 


TEENCH  EXPLOEATIONS.  29 

he  said  with  passionate  vehemence,  "Irresolution  and 
deliberation  are  no  longer  in  reason.  It  is  not  only  New 
Orleans  that  I  will  cede,  it  is  the  w^hole  of  the  colony  with- 
out reservation."  The  treaty  was  ratified  in  October, 
1803,*  and  the  Louisiana  territory  became  the  property  of 
the  United  States.^ 

12.  The  United  States  Occupies  the  Territory. — The 
treaty  which  made  Kansas  United  States  territory  was 
concluded  April  30,  1803,  but  St.  Louis,  and  the  province 
of  Upper  Louisiana,  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  Spanish 
until  March  9,  1804,  nearly  a  year  afterward.  On  that 
day  Major  Amos  Stoddard^  of  the  United  States  army 
appeared  at  St.  Louis,  and  acting  as  agent  of  the  French 
Republic,  received  from  Don  Carlos  de  Hault  Delassus, 
the  Spanish  Lieutenant-Governor,  the  formal  cession  of 
the  province  from  Spain  to  France.  The  Spanish  Eegi- 
ment  of  Louisiana  moved  out ;  a  detachment  of  the  First 
United  States  Artillery  marched  in;  the  American  flag 
was  raised ;  and  the  next  day.  Major  Stoddard  began  the 
rule  of  the  L^nited  States  under  the  title  of  commandant. 
The  value  of  the  great  acquisition  to  the  United  States 
cannot  be  overestimated.  One  million  square  miles  of 
splendid  territory,  an  empire  in  itself,  was  added  to  the 
national  domain ;  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  River 

4.  The  treaty  was  negotiated  by  Livingston  and  Monroe.  Barbe  Mar- 
bois  and  Tallyrand.  The  province  of  Louisiana,  consisting  of  over  1,000.- 
000  square  miles,  was  purchased  for  $15,000,000.  The  interest  on  th'e 
amount  and  the  satisfaction  of  claims  made  the  total  sum  $27,267,621. 

5.  While  Sp.Tin  held  Louisiana  she  demanded  excessive  duties  for  the 
American  commerce  that  passed  in  or  out  of  the  river. 

Because  the  treaty  by  which  Louisiana  was  ceded  to  France  was  kept 
secret  the  Spanish  held  possession  in  America. 

6.  Major  Amos  Stoddard,  who  was  the  descendant  of  the  great  divine, 
.Jonathan  Edwards,  and  grand-uncle  of  Hon.  John  Sherman,  of  Ohio,  was 
the  first  American  commander  of  the  Kansas  country.  He  was  a  good 
man  and  a  brave  soldier. 


30  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

was  forever  insured  and  the  political  power  and  integrity 
of  our  government  against  foreign  intrusion  was  pre- 
served. 


Eeview  Questions. — Describe  the  Louisiana  Territory. — On  what 
grounds  did  the  French  lay  claim  to  it? — For  whom  was  the  Territory 
named? — Na,me  two  French  explorers  of  Kansas;  give  date  of  explo- 
ration and  territory  explored. — Why  did  Bourgmont  gather  so  many 
tribes  and  travel  in  such  state? — Why  did  he  consider  the  treaty 
significant? — Give  the  history  of  the  Louisiana  Purchase. — What  did 
Napoleon  desire  to  do  in  Louisiana? — Give  four  reasons  for  the  sale 
of  the  Territory. — Why '  did  the  United  States  government  desire  to 
acquire  it? — What  was  the  total  cost? — When  was  the  treaty  con- 
cluded?— Why  did  the  Spanish  have  possession  when  Stoddard  came 
to  St.  Louis? — Did  the  secret  treaty  have  anything  to  do  with  the 
condition? — What  has  been  the  influence  of  the  Louisiana  Purchase 
on  subsequent  history? 


CHAPTER  IV. 


AMERICAN   EXPLORATION. 

Lewis  and  Clark  Expedition,  1804. 

13.  Planned  by  Jefferson. — With  the  acquisition  of 
Upper  Louisiana  by  the  United  States,  came  the  spirit  of 
enterprise  and,  exploration.  In  the  latter  direction  the 
new  government  set  the  example.  President  Jefferson 
was  full  of  interest  and  curiosity  about 
the  new  empire  of  which  so  little  was 
really  known,  and  wrote  with  his  own 
hand  the  directions  governing  the  expe- 
dition which  was  to  set  out  under  Cap- 
tain William  Clark,  brother  of  General 
George  Rogers  Clark,  the  conqueror  of 
Illinois,  and  Captain  Merriwether  Lewis, 
who  had  been  the  President's  private  ^"p*"  ^^'"''' 
secretary.  He  selected  both  these  guides  and  leaders 
from  personal  acquaintance ;  both  were  Virginians,  and 
from  his  own  neighborhood. 

14.  Expedition  in  Kansas. — The  expedition  reached 
the  rendezvous  near  St.  Louis  early  in  the  spring,  and 
before  the  Spaniards  were  willing  to  acknowledge  the 
Missouri  as  an  American  river.  After  the  formal  trans- 
fer the  expedition,  on  the  10th  of  May,  1804,  started  up 
the  turbid  Missouri,  and  on  June  27th  reached  the  mouth 

31 


Clark. 


32  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

of  the  Kansas  River,  landed  and  made  a  camp  within  the 
present  limits  of  Kansas  City,  Kansas.  Proceeding  up 
the  stream,  the  voyagers  iioted  in  the  different  journals 
objects  on  either  shore  which  may  still  be  recognized  by 
the  description.  On  the  4th  of  July,  1804,  the  party 
landed  at  or  near  the  present  site  of  Atchison  at  noon, 
and  made  brief  observance  of  their  country's  natal  day. 
They  named  a  small  stream  near  their 
landing  place  Fourth  of  July  Creek,  and 
going  on  up  the  river  four  miles,  called 
another  Kansas  stream  Independence 
Creek,  a  name  which  it  bears  to  this 
day.  Thus  was  the  Fourth  of  July  first 
celebrated  in  Kansas. 

15.  West  to  the  Pacific. — A  few  days 
later,  the  boats  had  passed  beyond  the  ^^^*'  ^^^^^^^*^^''  ^^^^^ 
limits  of  Kansas,  and  the  voyagers  were  on  their  way  to 
the  ''land  of  the  Dakotas,"  to  the  unknown  springs  of 
the  Missouri,  to  the  untrodden  passes  of  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains, to  the  far  Columbia,  and  on  to  the  sounding  surges 
of  the  Pacific.  The  explorers  returned  after  two  years, 
with  the  loss  of  but  a  single  man  in  all  the  perils  of  the 
waste  and  wild. 

PIKE'S   EXPEDITION.      - 

16.  Purpose  and  Route. — In  July,  1806,  two  years  and 
two  months  after  the  Lewis  and  Clark  expedition  had 
gone  up  the  Missouri,  another  expedition  left  Belle  Fon- 
taine, a  small  town  near  St.  Louis,  under  the  command 


AMEEICAN  EXPLOKATION.  33 

of  Lieutenant  Zebulon  Montgomery  Pike,^  a  young  and 
active  officer  of  the  United  States  army.  His  instructions 
from  the  government  were  "to  take  back  to  their  tribe 
on  the  upper  waters  of  the  Osage  River  some  Osage  In- 
dians who  had  been  redeemed  from  captivity  among  the 
Pottawatomies ;  then  to  push  on  to  the  Pawnee  Republic 
on  the  upper  waters  of  the  Republican  River,  then  to  go 
south  to  the  Arkansas,  and  to  the  Red  River,  interview- 
ing on  the  way  the  Comanches." 

17:  Route  Through  Missouri. — Pike  followed  the  Mis- 
souri to  the  mouth  of  the  Osage.  Turning  at  that  pic- 
turesque stream,  he  traversed  its  banks  until  he  came  to 
the  Osage  villages  near  the  present  line  of  Kansas.  There 
he  met  Chief  White  Hair.  Procuring  horses  at  the  vil- 
lages, Pike  mounted  his  party  of  some  twenty  officers  and 
soldiers,  and  a  number  of  Osage  Indians,  and  started  to 
execute  the  remainder  of  his  mission, 

18.  Entrance  Into  Kansas. — Lieutenant  Pike  entered 
Kansas  in  what  is  now  Linn  County.  He  kept  on  to  the 
southwest,  and  climbing  a  high  rise,  came  upon  a  sight 
which  has  delighted  millions  of  eyes  since,  ''the  prairie 
rising  and  falling  in  beautiful  swells  as  far  as  the  sight 
can  extend."  The  party  came  later  to  a  ridge,  which 
Pike  describes  as  the  dividing  line  between  the  waters 
of  the  Osage  and  Arkansas.  Still  marching  westward, 
they  reached  the  Neosho  River,  and  crossing  it,  followed 

1.  When  Pike  was  a  young:  follow  he  was  with  his  father,  who  had 
command  of  a  company  at  New  Orleans.  It  became  necessary  to  send 
some  important  dispatches  to  Cincinnati.  Colonel  Pike  called  his  men 
before  him  and  asked  for  volunteers  for  the  dangerous  journey.  Young 
Zebulon  unhesitatingly  stepped  forward  and  said,  "I'll  go,  Father."  With 
one  companion,  he  made  his  way  on  horseback  among  hostile  Indians  up 
the  Mississippi  River,  crossed  the  ice  on  the  Ohio  and  delivered  the  dis- 
patches in  safety. 


Lieut.  Zebulon  Montgomery  Pike. 


AMEEICAN  EXPLOEATION.  35 

the  divide  between  the  Neosho  and  the  Verdigris.  On 
the  17th  of  September,  going  northward,  they  arrived  at 
the  Smoky  Hill  River,  and  after  two  days  reached  the 
Saline  River. 

19.  The  Trail  of  Spanish  Troops. — It  was  about  this 
time  that  Pike  came  across  the  trail  of  Spanish  troops. 
The  Spanish  authorities  in  New  Spain,  hearing  from  St. 
Louis  of  his  departure,  had  sent  Lieutenant  Malgares  with 
a  large  party  to  intercept  him.  Malgares  had  gone  up  the 
Red  River,  thence  north  to  the  Arkansas,  and  so  on  to 
the  Saline,  but  the  parties  had  missed  each  other.  Lieu- 
tenant Pike  was  destined  to  meet  Lieutenant  Malgares 
later. 

20.  The  Stars  and  Stripes  Unfurled. — Pike's  party 
reached  Pawnee  Republic  on  the  25th  of  September,  1806. 
Its  principal  village  was  located  in  what  is  now  White 
Rock  township.  Republic  County,  near  the  present  town 
of  Republic  City. 

The  spot  was  made  memorable.  Pike  had  but  sixteen 
white  soldiers.  His  Osage  allies  he  probably  did  not 
count  for  much,  since  he  describes  them  as  ''a  faithless 
set  of  poltroons,  incapable  of  a  great  and  genei;ous 
action.".  With  his  little  force,  however,  he  overawed 
the  sullen  and  hostile  villagers.  He  met  in  council  400 
Pawnee  warriors  on  September  29,  1806.  The  Spanish  flag 
was  flying  from  a  pole  in  front  of  the  council  lodge. 
Pike  ordered  it  lowered  and  the  American  flag  raised  in 
its  stead.  It  was  done,  and  the  "Stars  and  .Stripes"  for 
the  flrst  time  was  given  to  the  Kansas  breeze.  Regardless 
of  the  temper  of  the  Indians,  he  remained  in  the  neigh- 


36  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

borhood  until  the  9th  of  October,  when  he  marched  off  in 
the  direction  of  the  Great  Bend  of  the  Arkansas  River. 

21.  The  Party  Divided. — When  he  arrived  at  the 
Arkansas,  Pike  divided  his  party.  Two  canoes  were  con- 
structed. One  canoe  was  made  of  four  buffalo  hides 
and  two  elk  skins  and  another  was  fashioned  of  green 
Cottonwood.  In  these  Lieutenant  Wilkinson,  six  soldiers 
and  two  Osage  Indians  embarked  for  Fort  Adams,  on 
the  Mississippi.  They  were  soon  obliged  to  abandon  their 
canoes  and  make  their  way  on  foot.  Their  progress  was 
slow ;  they  suffered  intensely  from  the  cold.  Finally  they 
built  other  boats,  and  though  greatly  hindered  by  floating 
ice  and  sand  bars,  they  managed  to  reach  Arkansas  Post 
in  safety,  January  9,  1807. 

Pike  with  the  other  division  of  the  party  stood  at  the 
parting  of  the  ways  on  the  low  bleak  shore  of  the  Ar- 
kansas River.  It  was  the  last  of  October,  and  snow  was 
falling  every  day.  Why  he  did  not  march  south  to  the 
Red  River  according  to  his  first  instructions  has  never 
been  made  clear;  instead,  he  moved  up  the  Arkansas, 
climbing  the  long  slope  to  the  Rocky  Mountains.  The 
country  was  full  of  wild  horses ;  Indians  were  met'  fre- 
quently, and  again  the  Spanish  trail  was  crossed. 

22.  Pike's  Peak.— On  November  15,  1806,  Pike  saw 
something  else.  ''At  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,"  he 
writes,  "I  thought  I  could  distinguish  a  mountain,  which 
appeared  like  a  small  blue  cloud;  I  viewed  it  with  a  spy 
glass,  and  was  still  more  confirmed  in  my  conjecture,  yet 
communicated  it  only  to  Dr.  Robinson,  one  of  the  com- 
pany, who  was  in  front  of  me.  In  half  an  hour  it  ap- 
peared in  full  view  before  us.     When  our  small  party 


AMERICAN  EXPLORATION. 


37 


arrived  on  the  hill,  they,  with  one   accord,   gave  three 
cheers  for  the  Mexican  Mountains." 

What  Pike  saw  at  first  as  a  ''small  blue  cloud"  was 
the  Great  White  Mountain  of  the  Spaniards,  the  majestic 
eminence  afterward  named,  in  his  honor,  Pike's  Peak. 
He  measured  the  altitude  of  the  mountain,  making  it 
18,581^  feet  above  the  sea,  and  endeavored  to  reach  the 
summit,  but  without  success.    Afterwards  he  records,  "In 


Pike's    Peak. 

our  wanderings  in  the  mountains  it  was  never  out  of  our 
sight."  These  wanderings  entailed  fearful  suffering,  for 
the  soldiers  were  thinly  clad,  the  weather  was  severe,  and 
the  wild  waste  was  inhospitable. 

2.     The  actual  height  of  Pike's  Peals  is  14,147  feet. 


38  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

23.  Taken  Prisoner.— Pike  reached  the  west  fork  of 
the  Rio  Grande  and  built  a  stockade.  Here  he  was  cap- 
tured, as  an  intruder  on  Spanish  territory,  by  a  party 
of  Spanish  soldiers.  His  instruments  and  papers  were 
taken  from  him,  and  he  and  his  men  were  marched  as 
prisoners  to  Santa  Fe.  From  Santa  Fe  they  were  taken 
to  Chihuahua,  Mexico,  then  a  fine  city  of  60,000  inhabit- 
ants. Lieutenant  Malgares,^  who  had  searched  for  Pike 
in  Kansas,  commanded  the  escort.  Everywhere,  by  sol- 
diers and  people,  the  young  American  officer  was  treated 
more  as  an  honored  guest  than  a  prisoner.  Finally,  hav- 
ing been  the  recipient  of  several  valuable  presents,*  he 
was  taken  to  within  three  days'  march  of  the  American 
frontier  and  liberated.  He  arrived  at  Natchitoches, 
Louisiana,  July  15,  1807,  nearly  a  year  after  he  left  St. 
Louis. 

24.  Pike's  Subsequent  Career.— After  Pike's  return 
to  his-  own  country,  he  continued  in  the  army,  where  his 
rise"  was  rapid.  In  the  War  of  1812  with  Great  Britain, 
he  served  as  brigadier-gerie'raP  on  the  northern  frontier. 

3.  Malgares  is   pronounced  Mal-ga-ra'. 

4.  Among  the  presents  which  the  Spaniards  gave  Pike  were  a  quaint 
old  Spanish  edition  of  Don  Quixote  and  a  dress  pattern  of  beautiful 
white  satin.  The  dress  pattern  was  given  to  his  wife,  who  with  his  sister 
had  waited  in  great  anxiety  at  St.  Louis  for  the  home  coming  of  the 
wanderer. 

This  sister  was  a  great  favorite  of  General  Pike.  She  was  the 
mother  of  Mrs.  Sarah  Sturdevant  of  Larned.  Mrs.  Sturdevant  has  the 
precious  scrap  on  which  were  written  Jhe  last  words  General  Pike 
addressed   to   his   wife. 

.5.  Lieutenant  Pike  was  called  upon  to  take  command  of  the  expedi- 
tion to  the  north  at  the  request  of  General  Dearborn,  whose  health  was 
such  that  he  was  unable  to  make  the  trip.  In  order  that  Pike  should 
take  the  command,  it  was  necessary  that  he  be  made  a  brigadier  general. 
This  promotion  he  refused  to  accept  unless  his  father,  Major  Zebulon 
Pike,  who  had  served  long  and  creditably  in  the  army,  should  also  be 
promoted.  The  government  acceded  to  his  demand,  and  his  father  was 
made  Colonel. —  (Kansas   Historical   Collections.) 


AMERICAN  EXPLOEATION. 


39 


On  April  27,  1813,  he  planned  and  carried  out  an  at- 
tack on  York,  now  Toronto,  Canada,  and  was  fatally 
wounded  at  the  moment  of  victory.  At  his  request  the 
flag  of  the  captured  garrison  was  placed  beneath  his  head. 
As  his  dying  glance  met  the  folds  of  "Old  Glory,"  he 
said,  "Keep  the  flag  floating,"  and  expired. 


Erected  by  the   State  of  Kansas, 

1901, 

To  mark  the  site  of  the  Pawnee  Republic,  where 

Lieut.   Zebulon   M.   Pike 

caused    the    Spanish    flag   to   be    lowered 

and  the  flag  of  the  United  States  to  be  raised, 

September  29,   1806. 


25.  Prominent  in  Kansas  History. — The  name  of 
Zebulon  Montgomery  Pike  forms  a  part  of  the  history 
of  Kansas,  and  should  be  mentioned  with  honor,  because 
he  was  the  first  intelligent  American  explorer  of  the  in- 
terior of  Kansas ;  the  first  to  raise  the  flag  of  the  United 
States  within  its  present  borders,  and  the  first  to  record 


40 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


observations  of  the  Great  Plains  country  of  which  Kansas 
is  a  part.  The  story  of  natural  Kansas  was  spread  abaut 
the  world  by  his  journal  published  in  1810.® 


Early   Expeditions. 

26.  Long's  Expedition,  1819.— The  expedition  of  Pike 
was  followed  by  that  of  Major  Stephen  H.  Long,  who 
ascended  the  Missouri  (in  the  Western  Engineer)  for 
the  purpose  of  scientific  research.  This  was  the  first 
steamboat  on  these  waters.  Two  years  were  spent  in 
the  country  by  members  of  his  party.  They  studied  the 
topography,  geology  and  zoology  of  the  country  and  the 


6.  In  1899  Elizabeth  A.  .Johnson  of  Republic  county  deeded  to  the 
State  Historical  Society  eleven  acres  of  land,  containing  the  site  of  the 
old  Pawnee  village,  where  the  American  flag  was  first  unfurled  in  Kansas. 
The  deed  provided  that  the  society  should  fence  and  suitably  mark  the 
spot  for  historic  preservation.  The  legislature  of  1901  appropriated 
.$3,000  for  this  purpose.  The  deed  was  modified  so  as  to  require  only  that 
the  visible  remains  of  the  village  be  enclosed.  Accordingly  but  six  acres 
of  the  eleven  deeded  the  state  were  enclosed  with  an  iron  fence  costing 
$1,150,  and  a  Barre  Vermont  granite  shaft  twenty-six  feet  high  was  put 
up  at  a  cost  of  Sl.THO.  On  September  29,  3  901,  the  monument  dedicated 
to  the  memory  of  Zebulon  Montgomery  Pike  was  unveiled  with  appropriate 
ceremonies. 


AMEBIC  AN  EXPLOEATION. 


41 


life  and  customs  of  the  Indians.  Thomas  Say,  who  ac- 
companied the  expedition,  was  a  distinguished  scientist, 
and  wrote  some  very  valuable  descriptions  of  natural 
Kansas. 

27.  Fremont's  Expeditions. — John  C.  Fremont  made 
several  trips  across  Kansas  in  his  exploration  of  upper 
Louisiana  and  the  Oregon  country.  In 
May,  1842,  he  came  up  the  Missouri 
and  Kansas  Rivers  to  Chouteau's  trad- 
ing post  located  on  the  Kansas  River 
about  six  miles  west  of  its  mouth.  Here 
he  fitted  out  his  expedition,  and  with 
the  famous  Kit  Carson^  as  his  guide,  he 
proceeded  up  the  river,  and  camped 
near  the  present  site  of  Lawrence.  He 
crossed  the  river  where  Topeka  now 
stands,  and  proceeded  northwest  along  the  Blue  and 
Platte  rivers  to  the  Wind  River  Mountains.  He  returned 
by  way  of  the  Platte  River  to  the  Missouri.  Fremont 
made  four  later  expeditions. 

Eeview  Questions. — Name  four  American  expeditions  in  Kan- 
sas and  give  date  of  each. — By  whom  was  the  Lewis  and  Clark  Expe- 
dition planned  and  what  was  its  purpose? — Show  on  the  map  where 
Lewis  and  Clark  journeyed  through  Kansas. — Where  was  our  first 
Fourth  of  July  celebrated? — Give  the  purpose  of  the  Pike  Expedi- 
tion.— Trace  the  Pike  Expedition. — Name  three  incidents  showing 
Lieutenant  Pike's  bravery  and  patriotism. — Who  were  the  first  sci- 
entists in  Kansas? — Give  Fremont's  route  on  his  first  trip  through 
this  section. 

7.  Kit  Carson,  whose  real  name  was  Christopher  Carson,  was  a 
famous  American  hunter,  trapper,  Indian  fighter,  and  scout.  His  adven- 
tures read  like  a  romance.  He  came  to  be  regarded  throughout  the  coun- 
try as  the  typical  frontiersman,  resourceful  in  danger,  an  adept  with  the 
rifle,  and  skilled  even  beyond  the  Indians  in  woodcraft  and  knowl- 
edge of  wild  animals.  See  "Four  American  Pioneers,"  published  by  the 
American   Book   Company. 

The  Wind   River   Mountains   are   in   Colorado. 


Kit    Carson. 


CHAPTER  V. 

SOME   FAMOUS   TEAILS. 

28.  The  First  Trail. — The  faintest  trail,  and  perhaps 
the  earliest,  was  that  made  by  the  Indian  dog  dragging 
lodge  poles  from  place  to  place.  Then  came  the  first 
"white  man's  road,"  the  trace  of  the  packers'  loaded 
mules,  burros  and  horses,  then  the  wide  roads  made  by 
the  traders'  trains  and  the  army  wagons.  All  these  left 
their  mark  in  Kansas  in  the  years  when  it  was  not  an 
undiscovered  country,  but  lying  open  and  void,  waiting 
for  the  rising  of  the  Star  of  Empire. 

SANTA  FE  TRAIL. 

29.  The  City  of  Santa  Fe. — Pike  in  his  narrative  had 
described  the  ancient  city  of  Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico,  the 
oldest  city  in  the  present  United  States.  It  was  a  city 
of  perhaps  2,000  people,  with  its  public  square,  its  Palace 
of  the  Government,  its  Alameda,  its  quaint  church  of 
San  Miguel,  and  its  adobe  houses.  Spain  ruled,  and 
Spanish  practices  and  costumes  prevailed.  An  indescrib- 
able grace  of  foreign  flavor  pervaded  the  drowsy  old 
town ;  there  the  black-eyed  Spanish  beauty  reigned,  and 
the  soft  syllables  of  the  Spanish  language  were  heard. 
Santa  Fe,  however,  was  tributary  to  a  vast  country,  and 
a  great  amount  of  business  was  transacted  there.    It  was 

42 


SOME  FAMOUS  TEAILS. 


43 


said  that  $750,000  worth  of  goods  were  brought  to  the 
town  each  year. 

30.  The  Non-Intercourse  Rule  Broken. — On  account 
of  Pike's  description,  great  interest  was  aroused,  and 
many  individual  attempts  were  made  to  open  up  com- 
mercial relations  between  the  Missouri  border  and  Santa 
Fe.  These  attempts  generally  resulted  in  disaster.  The 
Spanish  government  desired  no  intercourse,  and  repressed 
all  such  by  demanding  excessive  tribute. 


Map  of  Some  Famous  Trails. 

The   Mexican   Revolution,   which   began   in   1810    and, 
triumphed  in   1821,   making  Mexico   a    republic,    broke 
down   the    non-intercourse    rule,    and    in    1824   the   first 
wagon    train    passed    over    the    road    from    Missouri    to 
Santa  Fe. 

31.  Early  History  of  the  Trail. — There  had  been  a 
trail  to  the  Southwest  before.  Indian  traditions  reveal 
the  story  of  a  well  marked  highway,  and  it  is  thought 
that  back  in  the   days   of  the   mound  builders   at  least 


44  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

parts  of  this  route  were  used.  The  fact  is  well  estab- 
lished that  it  was  a  common  road  for  Indian  tribes  for 
hundreds  of  years,  and  as  we  have  already  seen,  Coronado 
follcywed  it  on  his  way  to  Quivira. 

Baptiste  Le  Grande,  in  1804,  was  the  first  white  man 
to  make  the  trip  with  goods.  Captain  Bechnell  in  1821 
transported  successfully  the  first  pack  train,  and  in  1824 
came  the  wagon  trains.  On  August  10,  1825,  a  commis- 
sion of  the  United  States  and  representatives  of  the 
powerful  Osage  nations  met  under  a  great  oak  tree  near 
the  place  where  the  Santa  Fe  Trail  crosses  the  Neosho, 
and  made  a  treaty  which  led  to  the  stronger  establish- 
ment and  freer  use  of  the  "Trail."  The  place  has  since 
been  called  "Council  Grove,"  and  the  oak,  which  still 
stands,  "Council  Oak."  During  the  same  year  Major 
Sibley  commenced  the  survey,  and  for  three  years  was 
employed  in  layihg  out  the  highway  and  making  treaties 
with  the  various  tribes. 

32.  The  Eastern  Terminus. — The  eastern  terminus  was 
at  first  Franklin,  Missouri,  on  the  Missouri  River.  Later 
the  seat  of  trade  was  removed  to  Independence,  Mis- 
souri. In  time  the  business  was  divided  with  Westport, 
a  newer  town,  built  on  or  near  the  Kansas  line.  From 
the  Missouri  River  landing  of  Westport  has  since  grown 
Kansas  City. 

33.  Description  of  the  Trail.— Leaving  the  Missouri 
line,  the  trail  led  a  little  south  of  west  to  Council  Grove, 
and  then  across  the  country  to  strike  the  Arkansas  at 
the  center  of  the  arc  of  the  Great  Bend,  where  one  road 
continued  to  follow  the  river  into  what  is  now  Colorado, 
while  at  Cimarron  Crossing,  near  Fort  Dodge,  a  shorter 


SOME  FAMOUS  TRAILS.  45 

road  bore  off  to  the  southwest  to  the  Cimarron  Kiver 
and  to  New  Mexico.  The  Santa  Fe  trail  was  the  first 
broad  mark  made  by  civilization  across  the  face  of  the 
prairies.  It  was  a  great  road  775  miles  long,  500  miles 
of  which  were  in  Kansas,  a  hard,  smooth  thoroughfare, 
from  60  to  100  feet  wide.  It  had  not  a  bridge  in  its 
whole  extent,  and  was  the  best  natural  road  of  its 
length  ever  known  in  the  world.  In  token  that  it  had 
come  to  stay,  the  broad-faced  yellow  sunflower,  since 
chosen  by  Kansas  people  as  an  emblem  of  their  state, 
sprang  up  on  either  side  where  the  wheels  had  broken 
the  soil  along  the  wild  highw^ay. 

34.  Points  on  the  Trail. — A  famous  spot  on  the  trail 
is  the  crossing  of  the  Neosho  River  at  Council  Grove. 
The  ford  of  this  stream  in  the  heart  of  the  city  and 
the  main  street  are  the  same  old  highway  and  river  cross- 
ing where  thousands  of  feet  have  passed  in  bygone  years. 
Here  was  the  last  chance  to  buy  supplies,  and  here  the 
whites  and  Indians  met  often  in  council. 

The  Great  Bend  of  the  Arkansas  River^  was  dark  and 
bloody  ground;  thence  west  every  mile  has  witnessed 
conflicts  between  the  Indians  and  the  caravans  of  traders, 
or  between  different  tribes  of  Indians. 

Pawnee  Rock-  was  a  landmark,  known  from  one  end 
of  the  trail  to  the  other.  It  was  considered  one  of  the 
most  dangerous  points  on  the  long  and  perilous  road. 
This  was  a  favorite  battle  ground  of  thfe  tribes.     Here 

1.  The  Santa  Fe  railroad  bridge  crosses  the  Pawnee  Fork  at  the  pre- 
cise spot  where  the  old  trail  did. 

2.  Pawnee  Rock  has  been  given  to  the  state  by  the  Women's  Kansas 
Day  Club  and  Benjamin  P.  Unruh  of   the  town  of  Pawnee  Rock. 


46 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


the  Indians  would  hide  and 
stealthily  attack  caravan 
or  overland  coach  as  it 
attempted  to  cross  the 
stream. 

On  an  island  at  Larned, 
according  to  Major  Inman, 
occurred  a  savage  battle 
between  the  Pawnees  and 
Cheyennes,  in  which  the 
latter  were  severely 
defeated. 

So  on  through  scenes  of 
trial   and   conflict,   the   old 

trail      led      to      where      once  Pawnee  Rock. 

stood  old  Fort  Aubrey.  It  may  be  said  that  the 
five  hundred  miles  of  the  Santa  Fe  Trail  in  Kansas, 
during  the  years  that  it  was  traversed  by  all  classes 
of  travelers,  from  solitary  horsemen  to  the  marching 
armies,  witnessed  the  display  of  all  the  great  human 
qualities,  patience,  fortitude,  and  the  most  heroic  courage, 
as  contrasted  with  the  darkest  treachery  and  the  most 
cowardly  ferocity. 

35.  Its  Effect  on  Kansas  Development. — After  the  lay- 
ing out  of  the  highway,  Kansas  was  no  longer  a  solitude. 
A  stream  of  human  life  was,  as  it  were,  set  flowing 
through  the  country.  Trains  going  and  coming  over  the 
long  road  were  seldom  out  of  sight  of  each  other,  or  of 
the  gleam  of  the  nightly  fires.  Millions  of  dollars'  worth 
of  property  was  transported  by  the  pack  animals  and 


48  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

wagon  trains.  An  army  of  men  was  employed  to  drive 
and  care  for  a  host  of  animals.  This  army  included, 
besides  Americans,  many  Mexicans  as  teamsters  and 
packers,  an  art  in  which  they  stood  unrivaled.  Thus  the 
dark  features  and  soot-black  hair  of  the  ''greaser"  were 
made  familiar  from  the  Missouri  to  the  mountains.  The 
Spanish  words  incorporated  in  the  English  as  spoken  in 
Kansas  at  this  day,  date  back  to  the  days  of  the  Santa 
Fe  Trail. 

36.  The  Oregon  Trail.— The  Santa  Fe  Trail,  while, 
perhaps,  the  most  important,  was  not  the  only  great 
highway  existing  in  Kansas  before  it  was  recognized  as 
the  white  man's  country.  The  Oregon  Trail  was  a  great 
thoroughfare.  It  ran  through  Doniphan,  Brown,  Nemaha 
and  Marshall  counties  and  through  the  northeast  corner 
of  "Washington  County,  then  it  turned  into  Nebraska 
and  followed  the  North  Platte  westward.  By  it  a  great 
emigration  moved  on  to  California;  the  Mormons  used 
it  extensively.  Colonel  Inman  designated  this  trail  as 
the  "Great  Salt  Lake  Trail,"  and  others  as  the  California 
Eoad. 

37.  The  Fayetteville  Road.— In  the  days  of  the  Cali- 
fornia emigration  a  road  long  visible  after  it  ceased  to 
be  used  was  that  coming  from  Fayetteville,  Arkansas, 
northwestward,  and  joining  the  Santa  Fe  Trail  at  Turkey 
Creek,  in  McPherson  County. 

38.  Fort  Riley  Military  Road.— A  military  road  ran 
from  Fort  Riley  to  Leavenworth  and  down  to  Fort  Scott. 
It  has  been  said  that  the  valleys  of  the  Kansas  River  and 
of  the  Arkansas  River  were  the  first  to  be  used  as  thor- 


SOME  FAMOUS  TRAILS.  49 

oughfares  by  civilized  men  in  Kansas.  But  the  great 
geographical  truth  was  early  discovered  that  Kansas  is 
in  the  center  of  the  great  highway  from  the  valleys  of 
the  Mississippi  and  Missouri  to  the  mountains  and  the 
Pacific  Ocean. 

Eeview  Questions. — Name  four  famous  trails  or  roads  that 
were  noted  in  Kansas  history. — Draw  a  map  locating  them. — Describe 
the  termini  of  the  Santa  Fe  Trail. — How  do  you  account  for  the  great 
trade  which  passed  between  these  towns'? — Why  did  the  Mexican 
Revolution  break  down  the  non-intercourse  rule? — Who  was  the  first 
white  man  to  make  a  trip  over  the  Santa  Fe  Trail? — How  far  did  he 
travel? — Name  some  noted  places  on  the  Santa  Fe  Trail. — What  was 
its  value  to  Kansas  development? 


50 


HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 


Map  of  Kansas  included  in  defined  Indian  Country. 


Kansas   received   an   Eastern   Boundary   1820 —    a  Platte  Purchase. 


THE   INDIAN   COUNTRY. 

The  Prairie  expresses  itself  in  bronze.     In  no  other  material  does 
it  care  to  be  sculptured.    'Tis  a  sullen  metal  but  heroic. 

— W.   A.    QUAYLE. 

CHAPTER    VI. 

THE  COUNTKY  SET  APART  FOE  THE  INDIANS. 

39.  The  Eastern  Boundary. — In  1820,  by  the  organi- 
zation of,  Missouri  as  a  State  of  the  Union,  Kansas,  which 
was  before  without  form  as  part  of  Louisiana,  received 
an  eastern  boundary.  The  west  line  of  Missouri,  as  first 
established,  followed  a  meridian  line  north  and  south, 
drawn  through  the  mouth  of  the  Kansas  River  at  Kansas 
City,  to  the  Iowa  line.  This  line  was  really  a  line  between 
white  settlement  and  Indian  occupation.  The  portion 
of  Indian  ground  between  the  Missouri  line  and  the  Mis- 
souri River  was  ceded  by  the  lowas  and  Sacs  and  Foxes 
in  1836,  and  became  a  part  of  the  State  of  Missouri 
under  the  name  of  the  Platte  Purchase.  The  Missouri 
River  then  became  the  boundary,  but  Kansas  remained 
Indian  ground. 

40.  Limitation  of  Settlement  Theory. — It  seems  to 
have  been  considered  that  the  Missouri  River  was  the 
limit  of  possible  white  settlement.  Pike  had  written  of 
Kansas  in  his  journal  in  1806,  "From  these  immense 
prairies   may   arise   one   great   advantage   to   the  United 

51 


52 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


States,  viz. :  the  restriction  of  our  population  to  certain 
limits,  and  thereby  a  continuation  of  the  Union.  Our 
citizens  being  so  prone  to  rambling  and  extending  them- 
selves on  the  frontiers,  will,  through  necessity,  be  con- 
strained to  limit  their  extent  on  the  West  to  the  borders 
of  the  Missouri  and  Mississippi,  while  they  leave  the 
prairies,  incapable  of  cultivation,  to  the  wandering  abo- 
rigines of  the  country." 

In  the  days  between  1830  and  1854  the  principal  figures 
in  Kansas  were  Indians,  the  regular  army  officer,  the 
Indian  trader,  and  the  missionary. 

41.  Indian  Country. — What  is  now  Kansas  was  in- 
cluded  in   the   "Indian   Country"   by  act   of   Congress, 

May   26,   1830.     The  fol- 

lowing  metes  and  bounds 
formed  its  boundaries : 
"Beginning  on  the  Red 
River  east  of  the  Mexican 
boundary,  and  as  far 
west  as  the  country  is 
habitable,  thence  down 
the  Red  River  eastward 
to  Arkansas  territory, 
thence  northward  along 
the  line  of  Arkansas  Ter- 
ritory to  the  State  of  Mis- 
souri; thence  north  along  ^"^^^^  ^''''  '''^^'''  ^^^'' 
its  westwardly  line  to  the  Missouri  River,  thence  up  the 
Missouri  River  to  the  Puncah^  (or  Ponca)  River,  thence 

1.  The  Ponca  River  empties  into  the  Missouri  near  the  northern 
boundary  of  Nebraska. 


COUNTEY  SET  APART  FOR  INDIANS.  53 

westward  as  far  as  the  country  is  habitable,  thence  south- 
ward to  place  of  beginning."  This  gave  a  country  600 
miles  north  and  south  and  200  miles  east  and  west.  The 
country  was  not  considered  habitable  more  than  200  miles 
west  of  the  Missouri  line,  on  account  of  absence  of 
timber. 

Review  Questions. — How  did  Kansas  receive  an  eastern  boun- 
dary?— What  was  the  Platte  purchase? — How  did  Pike  value  the 
plains  of  Kansas? — Describe  the  Indian  country  of  1830. 


CHAPTER    VII. 


INDIAN  TRIBES  AND  CUSTOMS. 

42.  The  Indians.— The  oldest  authorities  represent  this 
country,  now  called  Kansas,  as  occupied  principally  by 
four  great  tribes  of  Indians,  the  Kanzas,-  the  Osages,  the 
Pawnees  and  the  Comanches.  or  Padoucas.  These  tribes 
seem  to  have  claimed  this  country 
among  them  and  to  have  extended 
widely  beyond  its  present  limits. 
They  belonged  principally  to  the 
barbarous  tribes.  Different  tribes, 
however,  showed  different  degrees  of 
advancement. 

43.  Traits  of  the  Four  Tribes.— 
The  Kanza,  Osage  and  Pawnee  In- 
dians lived  in  villages.  Their  lodges 
were  stationary,  circular,  and  cov- 
ered with  poles  and  earth.  In  the  Typical  Indian, 
center  of  the  roof  a  hole  allowed  the  escape  of  smoke 

1.  In  Scott  County  pueblo  ruins  have  been  discovered  which  are  be- 
lieved to  be  the  remnant  of  the  old  Apache  village  Cuartelejo,  mentioned 
in  the  Spanish  reports.  During  the  period  of  Spanish  control  the  Indians 
were  persecuted  with  such  cruelty  for  witchcraft  that  a  band  of  Apaches 
ran  away  and  settled  at  Cuartelejo.  They  were  afterward  taken  back  by 
the  Spaniards.  Eight  rooms  have  been  unearthed.  They  were  plastered, 
contained  pottery,  corn,  and  implements  of  the  domestic  life,  war  and 
the   hunt. 

2.  The  Kanza  Indians  claimed  northeastern  Kansas,  the  Pawnees 
northern  Kansas,  the  Padoucas  northwestern,  and  the  Osages  southern 
Kansas.  The  Pawnees  were  Quiviras.  The  Kansas  or  Kaws  were  the 
Escansaques,  thejiame  developing  from  Esc-in'sa  to  Canza  or  Kanza.  It 
is  said  to  mean  "people  who  came  from  the  place  of  the  south  wind." 

54 


INDIAN  TEIBES  AND  CUSTOMS. 


55 


from  the  fire-place  below.  Around  the  room,  mats 
of  reed,  artistic  in  workmanship,  were  sometimes  sus- 
pended. Beds,  elevated  from  the  ground  and  covered 
with   buffalo   skins   for   bedding,   were   arranged   beside 


War   Dance  in   the   Interjor  of   a   Kanza   Lodge. 

the  walls.     These  Indians  were  large  and  muscular,  with 
the   usual   Indian   characteristics    of    color    and    facial 


A  note  from  Isaac  McCoy's  Journal  :  "Different  persons  have  at  vari- 
ous times  written  the  name  (Kanza)  of  this  tribe  differently,  as  suited 
the  fancy  of  each.  We  have  chosen  to  adhere  to  the  pronunciation  of 
the  natives  themselves,  which  is  Kau-zau.  We  have  been  the  more  in- 
clined to  do  this  from  the  supposition  that  its  near  resemblance  to  the 
name  of  the  southern-  tribe  supposed  to  be  exterminated,  from  which 
Arkansas  River  derived  its  name,  the  proper  pronunciation  of  which  is 
Ah-kau-zau,  might  lead  to  a  development  of  facts  relative  to  the  origin 
of  these  people,  which  would  be  of  benefit  to  the  future  historian." 


56  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

markings.     They  dressed  in  skins  of  animals  and  dec- 
orated themselves  with  paint,  beads,  and  feathers. 

The  men  spent  their  time  fishing  and  hunting,  or  fight- 
ing, when  on  the  war  path.  The  women  cared  for  the 
lodges  and  cultivated  the  ground,  raising  corn,  pumpkins, 
and  melons.  They  dressed  and  served  the  meat  which 
the  men  brought  from  the  hunt,  and  carried  the  wood 
and  water.  The  hereditary  chief  was  the  principal  man 
of  the  clan;  there  were  several  subordinate  chiets,  all 
of  whom  held  their  positions  by  virtue  of  their  bravery 
in  battle.  The  clans  were  united  into  tribes,  whose  chiefs 
met  in  council  for  tribal  affairs.  The  Comanches  were 
a  branch  of  the  Shoshoni,  a  group  of  cognate  tribes,  hold- 
ing the  central  Kockies.  They  were  the  only  prairie 
tribe  of  the  group,  were  nomadic  after  their  migration 
into  Kansas,  and  resembled  the  savage  tribes  in  their 
leading  characteristics. 

44.  Other  Tribes. — Other  tribes  in  Kansas  classed  with 
the  savage  Indians.  They  had  no  permanent  abiding 
place,  but  moved  from  one  hunting  ground  to  another, 
their  belongings  dragged  on  lodge  poles  harnessed  to 
Indians  dogs.^  The  rude  tent-like  skin  wigwam  was  the 
only  protection  of  the  child  of  the  prairie  from  sun  and 
storm. 

45.  Religion  of  the  Indians. — The  religion  of  the  In- 
dians was  a  nature  worship  of  sun,  wind,  lightning, 
etcetera.  The  medicine  man  was  the  prophet  and  priest 
of  the  tribe.     Among  the  Shawnee  Indians  there  was  a 

3.     The  Indians  began  to  use  the  horse  as  early  as  1724. 


INDIAN  TKIBES  AND  CUSTOMS. 


57 


tradition  of  the  creation  agreeing  essentially  with  the 
account  in  Genesis. 

46.  The  Removal  Policy. — As  early  as  1824  the  United 
States  government  had  entered  upon  a  policy  of  remov- 
ing the  Indian  tribes  west  of  the  Mississippi,  to  a  country 
which  should  be  their  own,  and  in  the  Act  of  1830  the 
Indians  were  assured  in  almost  affectionate  language 
that  the  lands  they  were   given  in   exchange  for  those 


Barbarous    Indians.     Letter   Writing. 


they  were  already  occupying  should  be  theirs  forever, 
and  that  the  United  States  would  give  them  patents  if 
they  so  desired. 

Accordingly,  the  Kansas  and  Osage  Indians  were  re- 
stricted to  smaller  hunting  grounds,  in  order  to  make 


58 


HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 


room  for  the  Eastern  Indians.  The  Shawnees,  the  Dela- 
wares,  the  Sacs  and  Foxes,  the  lowas  and  the  Kickapoos 
were  brought  from  Missouri ;  the  Ottawas  and  the  Wyan- 
dottes  from  Ohio ;  the  Pottawatomies  from  Michigan, 
and  the  Miamis  from  the  Wabash  Valley.  Some  tribes 
of  the  Kanzas  were  driven  westward  to  the  Blue  River. 
The  Cherokees  were  granted  lands  in  Kansas,  but  never 
occupied  them  in  force.  Several  small  tribes,  the  Weas, 
the  Piankeshaws,  the  Muncies,  the  Peorias,  the  Kaskas- 
kias,  and  the  Chippewas  were  also  granted  lands.  The 
Indians  were  forced  to  move. 


Map  of  Indian   Reservations. 


Review  Questions. — Name  the  four  great  tribes  of  Indians 
which  occupied  Kansas  territory  in  1830. — Give  their  leading  charac- 
teristics.— What  was  the  religion  of  the  Indians'? — What  was  the 
removal  policy  and  how  was  it  carried  out? 


CHAPTER     VIII. 


MISSIONS,   TRADING  POSTS   AND  FOETS. 

Missions. 

47.  Grand  Village. — Near  Independence  Creek,  in 
Atchison  County,  there  once  stood  a  large  Kanza  Indian 
village  known  to  the  French  as  Grand  Village  des  Cansez. 
Jesuits  of  the  La  Salle-Marquette  type  established  a  sta- 
tion at  Grand  Village  as  early  as  1727. 

48.  Osage  Missions. — The  Presbyterians  established 
the  first  Protestant  mission  in  Kansas  for  the  Osage 
Indians  at  Neosho  and  at  Boudinot, 
on  the  Neosho  River,  in  1824.  Rev. 
Benton  Pixley  was  the  founder,  and 
with  others  labored  most  earnestly 
and  devotedly  there  for  the  benefit  of 
the  Indians  and  the  development  of 
their  children. 

The  first  Catholic  baptism  of  Kan- 
sas Indians  was  administered  by 
Father  Charles  La  Croix,  who  came  Father  John  schoenmakers. 
to  the  Osages  in  Missouri  in  1820,  where  the  Presbyte- 
rians had  already  established  their  Harmony  Mission.^ 
He  was  given  by  them  a  room  for  a  chapel,  and  baptized 
several  Osage  children.  In  1847  the  Rev.  John  Schoen- 
maker  came  to  the  Osages,  with  several  other  mission- 

1.  Harmony  Mission  was  in  what  is  now  Missouri  just  over  the  line 
from   Fort   Scott. 

59 


60 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


aries  and  Sisters  of  Loretto,  and  began  what  proved  for 
him  a  lifetime  labor  for  the  spiritual  and  temporal  benefit 
of  the  Osages.^  However  little  the  Indian  may  have 
cared,  the  labor  in  his  behalf  was  incessant. 

49.     The  Shawnee  Missions.^— In  1830  the  Rev.  Thomas 

Johnson  came  as  missionary  to  the  Shawnees.     A  few 

years  later  the  Shawnee    Manual    Labor 

School  was  established.    Here  the  Indian 

girls  were  taught  to  sew,  cook,  spin,  and 

weave,   and  the   Indian    boys    practiced 

farming,    carpentering,   shoemaking,   and 

brick  laying,  while  the  English  language 

and  the  studies  of  the  American  schools 

received  their  share  of  attention. 

The   Shawnees   attracted  the   good  of-^^^-  '^^^^^^  Johnson. 

fices  of  the  Friends  as  long  ago  as  the  date  of  their  treaty 

with  William  Penn.  Among  the  religious  teachers  of 
these  people,  Henry  Harvey  was  hon- 
orably distinguished  in  both  Ohio  and 
Kansas.  The  Friends  established  a 
large  mission  among  the  Shawnees  in 
what  is  now  Johnson  County. 

50.     Ottawa   Mission. — On    the    mis- 
sionary roll  of  honor  no  name  is  to  be 
written  above  that  of  Isaac  McCoy.  He 
was  the  effective  advocate  of  the  Act 
Isaac  McCoy.        of  ig3o  for  the  rcmoval  of  the  Indians 

2.  The  site  of  the  Catholic  Mission  became  the  town  of  Osage  Mis- 
sion and  for  a  time  the  county  seat  of  Neosho  county.  The  name  of  the 
place  was  afterward  changed  to   St.   Paul. 

3.  Shawnee  Mission  became  noted  in  territorial  chronicles  as  the 
meeting  place  of  the  first  Territorial  Legislature. 


MISSIONS,  TRADING  POSTS  AND  FORTS. 


61 


to  the  West,  and  preceded  the  Indians  to  Kansas,  explor- 
ing and  surveying  their  reservations.  He  was  known  and 
beloved  by  all  the  tribes.  Eev.  McCoy 
firmly  believed  in  the  possibility  of  the 
elevation  of  the  Indian,  and  worked  to 
that  end  until  the  close  of  his  life.  His 
work  at  Ottawa  Baptist  Mission  was  in 
association  with  Jotham  Meeker. 

There  is  in  the  annals  of  Kansas  no 
story  of  greater  devotion  than  that  of 
Rev.  Meeker  and  his  wife.  Mr.  Meeker,^^^''''-  Christina  Mccoy. 
called  by  the  Indians,  ''He  that  speaks  good  words," 
came  to  the  Shawnees,  in  the  Indian  country,  1833,  and 
later  went  to  the  Ottawas.  He  was  a 
practical  printer,  and  brought  to  Kansas 
the  first  printing  press  and  type.  He 
printed  the  first  book  in  Kansas,  and  pub- 
lished an  Indian  newspaper  and  many 
, books  in  the  Ottawa  language.  Mr. 
Meeker,  largely  assisted  by  one  of  his 
converts,  Mr.  J.  T.  "Tawa"  Jones,  estab- 
Rev.  Jotham  Meeker.  Hghed  a  church,  a  school,  and  a  fine  farm. 
After  years  of  patient  labor,  Jotham  Meeker  died  in  1854, 
and  was  followed  in  two  years  by  his  wife.  Both  rest 
where  they  fell  in  the  cause  of  religion  and  civilisation.* 


4.  The  State  Historical  Library  has  thirty-eight  volumes  of  manu- 
script containing  the  correspondence,  journals,  diaries,  etc.,  of  the  Rev. 
Isaac  McCoy.     They  cover  the  period  from  1809  to  1849. 

The  graves  of  the  Rev.  Jotham  Meeker  and  his  wife  are  in  an  old  for- 
saken cemetery  near  Ottawa,  Franklin  county.  Some  day  the  citizens 
of  the  state  may  honor  themselves  by  hunting  out  and  suitably  marking 
this  last  resting  place  of  these  brave  pioneers. 

The  diary  of  Rev.  Meeker  in  the  State  Historical  Library  contains  an 
account  of  the  great  flood  of  1844.  Had  this  diary  been  read  and  be- 
lieved by  the  people  of  the  river  valleys,  fewer  lives  would  have  been  lost 


62 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


51.  The  Iowa  Mission. — Rev.  Samuel  Irwin  began  a 
Presbyterian  mission  among  the  lowas  in  1837.  He 
erected  several  buildings  and  wrote  a  grammar  of  the 
Iowa  language.     A  daughter  of  Missionary  Irwin  is  be- 


Baptist  Mission,   established  in  1831.     Here  Meeker's  printing  press  was  first 
set    up   in   1833. 

lieved  to  have  been  the  first  white  girl  born  in  Kansas. 
52.  St.  Mary's  Mission.— In  1847  the  Catholic  mis- 
sionaries established  their  principal  headquarters  at  St. 
Mary's,^  on  the  Kansas  River,  and  thence  missionary 
priests  visited  the  different  tribes  while  they  remained. 

and  much  property  might  have  been  saved  from  destruction  in  the  great 
flood   of   1903.  ' 

The  Indians  have  a  tradition  that  the  Kansas  River  extended  from 
bluff  to  bluff  in  a  great  flood  before  the  white  man  came.  An  old  Indian 
observing  the  city  of  Topeka  in  construction,  grunted,  "White  man  heap 
big  fool." 

5.  The  building  here  pictured  was  erected  at  St.  Mary's  by  the 
Catholic  church  people.     It  was  not,   however,  the  first  Catholic   church 


MISSIONS,  T-RADING  POSTS  AND  FORTS. 


63 


SBlECrM4»J^: 


,iit^-£k?rm-AGR. 


53.     The  Work  of  the  Missionaries. — Several  other  mis- 
sions of  less  significance  than  the  ones  described  were 

established.  The  mission- 
aries were  heroic  pioneers 
of  Kansas.  They  invented 
phonetic  alphabets ;  they 
created  written  1  a  n  - 
guages,  wrote  dictionaries 
and  song  books,  and  gave 
the  Indian  the  Bible  and 
the  Christian  religion. 
They  went  into  the  rude 
lodges  and  wigwams  and 
cared  for  the  sick  and  the 
dying.  They  suffered 
from  poverty  and  often 
from  savage  cruelty;  they 
A  Meeker  Title  Page.  sacrificed      h  0  m  e     and 

friends,   and   many   died   alone   on  the   prairie   that  the 
Indians  might  know  the  better  way  and  the  higher  life. 


First  Cathedral  of  Kansas. 


that  was  built  on  Pottawatomie  creek,  probably  in  what  is  now  Anderson 
county.  It  became  a  widely  known  place,  and  many  people  passed  and 
repassed   the  spot   or   were  given   shelter   under   the   hospitable   roof. 


64 


HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 


'' Little  to  him  whose  feet  unshod 
The  thorny  path  of  the  desert  trod, 
Careless  of  pain,  so  it  led  to  God." 


54.  Trading  Posts.  —  Numerous 
trading  posts  were  established  dur- 
ing the  Indian  Period.  Trappers, 
hunters,  traders,  and  Indians  gath- 
ered there  and  bartered  their  goods, 
the  white  man  often  exchanging 
whiskey,  tobacco,  and  trinkets  for 
the  most  valuable  furs  and  skins. 
At  one  post  alone  the  trade  amount- 
ed to  $300,000  annually.     The  most 

noted     of     these     places     were     West-     ^ol.    Henry    Leavenworth. 

port  a  great  outfitting  station,  the  Chouteau  trading  posts 
on  the  Kansas  River  and  in  the  present  Linn  County, 

and  Bent's  Fort,    to    the    far 
West. 

55.  Forts  Established. — In 
consequence  of  the  presence  of 
the  Indians,  Fort  Leavenworth 
was  established,  in  1827,  by  a 
detachment  of  the  Third 
United  States  Infantry,  and 
was  named  in  honor  of  Colonel 
Henry  Leavenworth,  of  that 
Fort  Scott  was  lo- 
cated in  1842.  Fort  Riley,  the  third  important  post  in 
Kansas,  was  not  established  till  1853.  It  was  named  for 
General  Bennett  Riley,  who  guarded  the  Santa  Fe  Trail 
and  fought  in  Mexico. 


Baptist     Indian     Mission,     Shawnee' 

County.     Erected    in    1848.  rCffimCUt 


MISSIONS,  TEADING  POSTS  AND  FORTS. 


65 


37     ParalUl 

Map  of  Kansas  Territory. 


Eeview  Questions. — Name  the  great  missions  of  Kansas. — Who 
were  the  most  noted  missionaries? — What  were  the  methods  of  their 
service  for  the  uplift  of  the  Indian? — What  do  you  think  of  their 
devotion  to  duty  and  their  self-sacrifice? — Quote  Whittier's  lines  in 
commemoration, — Locate  four  trading  posts  and  tell  of  their  activi- 
ties.— What  forts  were  established  because  of  the  presence  of  the 
Indians? 


TERRITORIAL    PERIOD. 

'God  give  us  men.     A  time  like  this  demands 

Strong  minds,  great  hearts,  true  faith,  and  ready  hands; 

Men  whom  the  lust  of  office  cannot  kill; 

Men  whom  the  spoils  of  office  cannot  buy; 

Men  who  possess  opinion  and  a  will. 

Men  who  have  honor — men  who  will  not  lie; 

********* 

Tall  men — suncrowned,  who  live  above  the  fog 
In  public  duty  and  in  private  thinking. '  '• 

— J.  G.  Holland, 


REVIEW  OF  THE  SITUATION. 
CHAPTER    IX. 

THE   OEGANIC    ACT— THE   KANSAS-NEBRASKA   BILL. 

56.  The  Missouri  Compromise. — Slavery  troubles  in 
the  United  States  began  with  the  adoption  of  the  Con- 
stitution, but  the  territory  of  the  Louisiana  Purchase  was 
not  seriously  affected  until  the  passage  by  Congress  of 
the  Missouri  Compromise^  in  1820.  This  measure  pro- 
vided that  Missouri  should  be  admitted  as  a  slave  state, 
and  that  in  all  remaining  territory  west  of  the  Mississippi 
River  and  north  of  36°  30'  (the  southern  boundary  of 
Missouri)  slavery  should  be  forever  prohibited. 

57.  Result  of  the  Missouri  Compromise. — The  Missouri 
Compromise  was  a  great  surprise  to  the  people  who 
opposed  slavery,  for  they  had  hoped,  after  the  admission 
of  Louisiana  as  a  slave  state,  that  the  remainder  of 
Louisiana  territory  would  be  free.  To  even  things  up, 
Maine  was  admitted  as  a  free  state,  making  twelve  free 
and  twelve  slave  states  in  the  Union.  Congress  ha^d 
adopted,  the  plan  of  admitting  first  a  free  and  then  a 
slave  state  so  as  to  preserve  a  balance  of  power  in  that 
body.  This  geographical  subterfuge  was  not,  to  say  the 
least,  an  ideal  way  to  settle  a  question  of  great  moral 
consideration.     ''For  the  present,"    said    John    Quincy 

1.  In  1836  the  Missouri  Compromise  was  violated  by  an  act  of  Con- 
gress in  the  Platte  Purehase.  which  extenrled  the  boundary  of  Missouri 
in  the  northwestern  part,  to  the  Missouri  River,  admitting  thereby  slaves 
into  a  free  country. 

67 


68  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

Adams,  "the  contest  is  laid  asleep."  The  phrase  'laid 
asleep '  was  wisely  chosen,  for  the  terrible  question  gained 
new  strength  through  repose ;  when  it  awoke,  many  years 
later,  it  showed  itself,  as  Jefferson  predicted  it  would, 
more  irrepressible  and  more  formidable  than  ever. 

58.  Growth  of  the  Slave  Power. — As  the  years  went 
on,  many  anti-slavery  societies  were  formed,  in  the  South, 
at  first,  as  well  as  in  the  North.  Henry  Clay  declared 
that  "slavery  was  the  deepest  stain  upon  the  character 
of  our  country."  John  Quincy  Adams  thundered  philip- 
pics against  it ;  Wendell  Phillips '  oratory  moved  the 
masses ;  Emerson,  Lowell,  and  Whittier  wrote  in  heroic 
lines  the  call  to  duty;  abolitionists  of  the  North  spoke 
and  wrote  in  execration ;  Garrison  was  mobbed  and  Love- 
joy  murdered;  still  the  slave  forces  grew  in  strength. 
Texas  was  admitted  in  order  to  augment  its  power;  the 
Comp*romise  of  1850  was  its  victory,  and,  as  if  nothing 
could  hinder  its  progress,  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Bill  was 
proposed. - 

59.  Kansas-Nebraska  Bill. — This  bill  was  introduced 
by  Stephen  A.  Douglas,^  of  Illinois,  for  the  avowed  pur- 
pose of  taking  the  slavery  question  out  of  Congress  and 
putting  it  in  the  hands  of  the  people.  The  Nebraska 
country  was  the   country  west  of  Missouri,  Iowa,  and 

2.  The  Compromise  of  1850  provided  that  California  should  be  ad- 
mitted to  the  Union  as  a  free  state,  that  the  territories  of  Utah  and  New 
Mexico  should  be  formed  without  any  provision  concerning  slavery,  that 
slavery  should  be  prohibited  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  that  Texas 
should  be  paid  $10,000,000  to  give  up  her  claim  on  New  Mexico  and  that 
a  fugitive  slave  law  should  be  enacted  providing  for  the  return  of  run- 
away slaves   to   their   masters. 

California  in  her  constitution  had  provided  for  freedom  before  applying 
for  admission.  By  the  Compromise,  Utah  and  New  Mexico  were  made 
possible  for  slavery  and  the  fugitive  slave  law  made  the  North  a  hunting 
ground  for  runaway  slaves. 

.3.  The  Douglas  idea  was  called  "squatter  sovereignty."  The  squat- 
ters were  to  be  supreme  authority  on  the  great  question. 


THE  ORGANIC  ACT.  69 

Minnesota  territories.  It  was  north  of  the  Missouri 
Compromise  line  of  36°  30',  and  slavery  had  been  for- 
ever excluded  irom  its  boundaries  by  that  compromise. 
The  Kansas-Nebraska  Bill  provided  that  the  people  of 
the  territory  should  decide  whether  it  should  be  free  or 
slave.  The  bill  annulled  the  Missouri  Compromise ;  it 
seemed  to  those  opposed  to  slavery  that  it  threw  down 
all  bars,  and  the  threat  of  a  Southern  planter  that  he 
would  yet  call  the  roll  of  his  slaves  on  Bunker  Hill  would 
soon  be  carried  out.* 

60.  The  Kansas-Nebraska  Bill  in  Congress. — No  bill 
ever  introduced  in  Congress  provoked  such  excited  de- 
bate. Wade  raised  his  voice  against  ''giving  slavery  a 
chance  to  enter  a  territory  as  large  as  all  the  free  states, 
pure  as  water  and  beautiful  as  the  garden  of  God." 
Sumner  protested  vehemently  against  ''removing  the 
landmarks  of  freedom."  "We  are  on  the  eve  of  a  great 
national  transaction,"  said  Seward,  in  the  last  hours  of 
the  discussion,  "a  transaction  that  will  close  a  cycle  in 
the  history  of  our  country." 

The  debate  lasted  nearly  five  months.  The  bill  passed 
the  Senate  at  four  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  March  4, 
by  a  vote  of  thirty-seven  to  fourteen,  and  the  House  at 
midnight  of  May  22,  by  a  vote  of  113  to  100.  It  was 
signed  by  President  Franklin  Pierce,  May  30,  1854. 

61.  The  Reception  of  the  Bill.— The  triumph  of  the 
Kansas-Nebraska  Bill  was  received  throughout  the  North 

4.  Charles  Sumner,  Salmon  P.  Chase,  and  William  H.  Seward  were 
leaders  against  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Act.  There  were,  from  1852.  occa- 
sional feehle  attempts  to  indtice  action  for  a  territorial  organization  at 
Washington,  and,  in  18.58,  Abelard  Guthrie  was  nominated  as  delegate 
in  Congress  by  a  convention  at  Wyandotte,  while  Rev.  Thomas  Johnson 
was  put  in  nomination  at  the  Kickapoo  village.  The  latter  was  elected 
and  went  to  Washington,   but  was  not  received. 


70  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

with  demonstrations  of  grief  and  anger.  A  great  num- 
ber of  American  citizens,  with  the  experiences  of  the 
Missouri  Compromise  of  1820,  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law, 
and  the  Compromise  of  1850,  and  with  the  Dred  Scott 
Case  then  pending  in  the  courts,  did  not  believe  that 
the  bill  meant  an  honest  submission  of  the  question 
of  slavery  to  the  bona  fide  settlers  of  Kansas,  or  meant 
anything  except  a  determined  purpose  to  force  slavery 
upon  Kansas,  and  upon  every  territory  in  the  United 
States.  Douglas  was  condemned  all  through  the  North. 
He  said,  "I  could  travel  from  Boston  to  Chicago  by  the 
light  of  my  own  effigies." 

62.  Results  of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Bill. — The  conse- 
quences of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Bill  were  momentous. 
It  opened  the  territories  of  Kansas  and  Nebraska  as  a 
battleground  between  the  forces  of  freedom  and  slavery; 
it  gave  the  finishing  blow  to  the  Whig  Party;  it  made 
the  Democratic  Party  for  many  years  sectional  rather 
than  national ;  and  it  united  the  forces  which  formed  the 
Republican  Party.    We  shall  see  its  results  in  Kansas. 

Eeview  Questions. — Name  the  historical  events  which  reveal  the 
growth  of  the  slave  power  in  the  Nation  from  the  adoption  of  the 
Constitution  to  the  passage  of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Act. — What  was 
the  Missouri  Compromise  and  in  what  two  ways  did  it  affect  the  ter- 
ritory that  later  came  to  be  known  as  Kansas? — See  map,  page  65  and 
page  67. — Give  the  year  of  its  enactment. — What  was  the  Kansas- 
Nebraska  Bill? — State  its  purpose. — What  was  th,e  effect  of  its  intro- 
duction in  Congress? — How  was  it  received  by  the  country  at  large? — 
Find  anti-slavery  poems  in  the  writings  of  Whittier,  Lowell,  Long- 
fellow and  others  that  were  inspired  by  the  ''Crime  Against  Kansas." 
— How  are  Wendell  Philips,  Charles  Sumner  and  Abraham  Lincoln 
connected  with  Kansas  history  at  this  time? — Give  four  results  of  the 
Kansas-Nebraska  Bill. 


CHAPTER    X. 

KANSAS  TEREITOEY. 

63.  The  Name  Kansas. — The  Kansas-Nebraska  Act 
defined  the  boundaries  of  the  new  territory  and  gave  to 
it  the  name  Kansas.  The  spelling  and  definition  of  the 
word  have  been  the  cause  of  much  discussion.  Professor 
Dunbar,  formerly  of  Kansas,  a  most  accomplished  Indian 
linguist,  states  that  the  name  of  the  Kansas  River  is 
derived  from  the  Kansas  Indian  word  Kanza,  meaning 
'^  swift." 

64.  Kansas  Boundary. — The  following  are  the  limits 
of  the  territory  as  given  in  the  act :  Beginning  at  a  point 
on  the  western  boundary  of  Missouri,  where  the  87th 
parallel  of  north  latitude  crosses  the  same ;  thence  west 
on  said  parallel  to  the  eastern  boundary  of  New  Mexico ; 
thence  north  on  boundary  to  latitude  38;  thence  follow- 
ing said  boundary  westward  to  the  east  boundary  of  the 
Territory  of  Utah,  on  the  summit  of  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains ;  thence  northward  on  said  summit  to  the  40th  paral- 
lel of  latitude ;  thence  east  on  said  parallel  to  the  western 
boundary  of  the  State  of  Missouri ;  thence  south  with  the 
western  boundary  of  said  state  to  the  place  of  beginning. 

The  south  line  was  not  made  to  conform  with  the  line  of 
the  Missouri  Compromise,  36°  30',  but  was  fixed  at  the 
37th  parallel,  the  boundary  between  the  reservations  of 

71 


72  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

the  Cherokees  and  the  Osages.    The  area  is  126,283  square 
miles. 

65.  The  Population. — At  the  organizatit)n  of  the  ter- 
ritory, the  white  population  of  Kansas  consisting  of  six 
or  seven  hundred  citizens,  was  concentrated  about  the 
forts,  trading  posts,  missions,  and  reservations  from  the 
Missouri  River  to  Council  Grove.  The  largest  number 
were  located  in  and  around  Uniontown  in  what  is  now 
Shawnee  County.  The  population  was  small,  scattered, 
and  uninterested  in  public  affairs. 

66.  Across  the  Border. — Missouri,  on  account  of  her  own 
institution  of  slavery,  was  interested  in  Kansas.  Western 
Missouri  contained  50,000  slaves,  and  abolition  in  Kansas 
meant  danger  to  property  and  social  forms  there.  In 
fact,  it  was  stated  in  a  representative  pro-slavery  con- 
vention in  Lexington,  in  July,  1855,  "that  the  endorse- 
ment of  restriction  in  the  settlement  of  Kansas  was  vir- 
tually the  abolition  of  slavery  in  Missouri."  David  R. 
Atchison,  United  States  Senator  from  Missouri,  was  the 
leader  of  the  pro-slavery  element,  and  B.  F.  Stringfellow 
was  a  close  subordinate.  He  urged  that  Kansas  be  flooded 
with  slaves,  and  that  when  they  were  found  profitable 
they  would  be  retained. 

67.  Missourians  in  Kansas. — President  Pierce  had 
barely  signed  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Bill  before  large  num- 
bers of  Missourians  rushed  across  the  line  and  seized  the 
best  lands.  Settlers  were  required  to  live  on  their  claims 
a  stated  length  of  time  and  build  houses  preparatory  to 
making  homes,  but  the  Missourians,  not  even  waiting  for 
the  Indians  to  get  out  of  the  way,  staked  out  claims, 
sometimes  merely  notching  trees  or  crossing  a  few  logs 


KANSAS  TEKRITOKY.  73 

to  represent  a  cabin,  and  then  went  back  to  Missouri, 
"They  were  men  who  proposed  to  reside  in  Missouri, 
but  vote  and  fight  in  Kansas.  Jubilant  and  defiant,  they 
threatened  with  death  any  abolitionist  who  would  dare 
to  settle  in  the  territory." 

68.  New  England  Emigrant  Aid  Society. — On  the  pas- 
sage of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Bill  the  Anti-slavery  people 
were  thoroughly  discouraged.  Theodore  Parker  said,  "In 
the  steady  triumph  of  despotism,  ten  years  more  like  the 
ten  years  past  and  it  will  be  all  over  with  the  liberties  of 
America."  And  Garrison  wrote,  "Will  Kansas  be  a  free 
state?  We  answer,  No!  Not  while  the  existing  Union 
stands.  Its  fate  is  settled."  But  there  was  one  man  who 
dwelt  in  the  "valley  of  vision";  he  believed  that  what 
was  planned  for  evil  could  be  turned  to  good;  that  the 
Kansas-Nebraska  Bill  might  yet  serve  freedom's  cause. 
Eli  Thayer,^  of  Boston,  member  of  the  Massachusetts 
legislature,  advocated  with  great  enthusiasm  the  idea  of 
free  state  emigration  to  Kansas.  His  efforts  interested 
some  prominent  men  of  Massachusetts,  and  as  a  result 
the  New  England  Emigrant  Aid  Society^  was  formed, 
with  J.  C.  Brown  as  president.  Mr.  Thayer  traveled 
60,000  miles  and  gave  a  great  many  lectures  in  the  inter- 
est of  organized  emigration,  and  Amos  A.  Lawrence,  a 
wealthy  financier,  contributed  large  amounts  from  his 
private  fortune  to  further  the  enterprise.  Dr.  Charles 
Robinson,  who  had  been  a  factor  in  California's  admission 
as  a  free  state,  was  made  local  agent. 

1.  Mt.  Oread  of  Lawrence  University  was  named  after  the  Mt.  Oread 
school  in  Worcester,  of  which  Mr.  Thayer  was  founder. 

2.  The  Emigrant  Aid  Society  offered,  fifty  dolhirs  for  the  best  poem 
on  the  subject  of  Emigration.  The  prize  was  won  by  Lucy  Larcom,  then 
a  teacher  in  Wheaton  Seminary,  at  Norton,  Massachusetts,  on  the  poem, 
"The  Call  to  Kansas." 


74  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

69.  The  Purpose  of  the  Society. — The  aim  of  the  or- 
ganization was  to  induce  first-class  emigrants  to  go  to 
Kansas,  to  protect  them  from  the  hardships  of  pioneer 
settlement,  to  select  territory  under  experienced  leaders, 
to  invest  capital,  and  provide  hotels,  saw  mills,  grist 
mills,  newspapers,^  schools,  and  other  improvements. 
Anyone,  whether  in  sympathy  with  the  organization  or 
not,  was  at  liberty  to  take  advantage  of  its  benefits. 
Expenses  were  not  paid. 

The  colonists  sent  by  the  company  in  1854  numbered 
seven  hundred  and  fifty-one.  About  $140,000  was  spent 
by  the  association  for  its  work  in  Kansas. 

70.  Other  Organizations. — Other  anti-slavery  organi- 
zations were  ''The  Emigrant  Aid  Society  of  New  York 
and  Connecticut,"  and  the  Union  Emigration  Society  of 
Washington.  The  border  counties  of  Missouri,  also  active, 
rang  with  the  note  of  the  preparation  of  pro-slavery  and 
''Defensive  Associations,"  "Squatter  Associations," 
"Blue  Lodges,"  and  other  secret  and  open  societies  were 
formed.  The  issue  was  joined.  In  the  ears  of  those  who 
marched  to  Kansas  from  the  conquering  North,  sounded 
a  watchword  which  has  always  rung  in  men's  ears  like 
the  note  of  a  trumpet,  or  breathed  as  the  voice  of  a  siren ; 
it  was — "Freedom."* 

3.  A  powerful  literary  agency  enlisted  for  the  winning  of  Kansas  was 
the  New  York  Tribune,  edited  by  Horace  Greeley. 

4.  There  were  many  claim  disputes,  the  most  serious  being  at  Law- 
rence ;  for  as  Lawrence  was  the  only  Free  State  town  then  well  estab- 
lished, the  opponents  were  anxious  to  get  it  out  of  the  way.  The  town 
site  of  Lawrence  was  purchased  for  $500  of  a  Mr.  Stearns.  Soon,  how- 
ever, another  claimant,  John  Baldwin,  appeared,  and  demanded  that  a 
tent  belonging  to  a  Lawrence  settler  be  removed.  His  demand  was  re- 
fused. Baldwin  secured  the  assistance  of  attorneys  and  laid  out  a  plot 
for  a  town,  but  this  did  not  avail,  for  the  Lawrence  settlers  quietly  held 


KANSAS  TEEEITOEY. 


75 


71.  Towns  Founded. — President  Pierce  signed  the 
Kansas-Nebraska  Act,  May  30.  On  the  13th  of  June  the 
Leavenworth  Town  Company  was  organized  at  Weston, 
Missouri.  In  the  same  month  the  first  newspaper  in  Kan- 
sas the  ''Leavenworth  Herald,"  was  printed  under  a  tree 


Lawrence,    Kan.,    1855. 


on  the  town  site.  The  Atchison  town  company  was 
formed  in  Missouri,  July  27.  Leavenworth,  Atchison,  and 
Lecompton  were  founded  by  pro-slavery  people  from  Mis- 
souri. 

The  free  state  emigrants  founded  Lawrence  and  To- 

their  own.  Finally  the  Missourians,  resorting  to  forceful  measnre.s, 
assembled  about  eighteen  men  in  arms,  and  sent  this  notice  to  Dr.  Robin- 
son :  "If  yoii  do  not  remove  that  tent  in  thirty  minutes  we  will."  Dr. 
Robinson  sent  back  the  laconic  reply,  "If  you  molest  our  property,  you  do 
it  at  your  peril."     About  thirty  of  the  Lawrence  men  came  together  with 


76  HIST  OK  Y  OF  KANSAS. 

peka,^  and  later  Osawatomie,  Manhattan,  and  Wabaunsee. 
On  the  first  day  of  August,  1854,  the  pioneer  party  from 
New  England,  under  Mr.  C.  H.  Branscomb,  reached  Law- 
rence. Two  weeks  afterward  they  were  followed  by  a 
larger  party  under  the  leadership  of  Dr.  Charles  Eobin- 
son  and  Samuel  C.  Pomeroy.  The  town  was  named 
Lawrence  in  honor  of  the  treasurer  of  the  society.  At 
first  Lawrence  was  merely  a  collection  of  tents.  These 
were  superseded  by  queer  grass-thatched  huts  and  rude 
mud-plastered  log  cabins.®  In  these  crude  homes  dwelt 
some  rare  New  England  men  and  women,  imbued  with 
the  spirit  of  their  forefathers  who  had  come  to  America 
that  they  might  worship  God  in  their  own  way,  according 
to  the  dictates  of  their  own  conscience. 

Dr.  Robinson  as  captain  to  guard  the  tent.  He  proposed  to  arbitrate,  but 
the  opposing  party  refused,  and  declared  that  if  the  Lawrence  people  did 
not  surrender  in  one-half  hour,  a  force  of  .3,000  if  not  30,000  Missourians 
would  be  raised  and  "would  sweep  them  off  the  face  of  the  earth."  The 
half  hour  passed  and  a  quarter,  still  there  was  no  attack.  When  Dr. 
Robinson  was  asked,  "What  shall  we  do  if  the  Missourians  attempt  to 
remove  the  tent;  shall  we  fire  to  hit  or  fire  over  their  heads?"  "Well," 
said  Dr.  Robinson,  "I  should  be  ashamed  to  fire  at  a  man  and  not  hit 
him."  A  spy  overheard  the  remark  and  reported  to  the  Missoi;rians.  They 
withdrew   very   soon. 

r).     Topeka  was  founded  December  5,  1854. 

0.  A  note  from  Mrs.  Robinson's  Diary  :  "We  attended  church.  How 
strange  everything  appeared.  The  hall  where  the  meetings  are  held 
is  a  two-story  wooden  building.  It  is  simply  boarded  with  Cottonwood 
and  that,  to  a  person  in  th(2  country  is  explanation  sufficient  of  its  whole 
appearance ;  for  the  sun  here  soon  curls  the  boards,  and  every  one  shrinks 
from  every  other,  leaving  large  cracks  between.  For  a  desk  to  support 
the  gilded  morocco-covered  Bible,  sent  by  the  Plymouth  church,  a  rough 
box  turned  endwise  and  standing  near  one  end  of  the  hall  was  used.  The 
singers  were  seated  upon  one  side  of  the  preacher,  while  upon  the  other 
side  also  fronting  the  desk  were  other  seats — rough  boards  used  until  the 
settees  are  finished.  All  this  seems  rough  and  uncouth,  and  at  the  first 
moment  we  felt  that  two  thousand  miles  lay  between  us  and  the  pleasant 
sanctuary  of  our  fathers.  But  when  we  look  on  the  pleasant  faces 
around  us,  and  the  services  commenced  with  the  singing  of  hymns  learned 
long  ago,  and  we  heard  tn  the  persuasive,  winning  tones  of  the  preacher 
the  same  heavenly  truths  which  will  render  one's  life  here  as  holy  as 
elsewhere,  we  felt  that  N^w  England  was  in  our  midst.  We  realized 
more  fully  the  truth  which  has  been  pervading  our  thoughts  for  many 
days  that  "a  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things 
which   he  possesseth." 


KANSAS  TEKKITORY.  77 

The  Song  of  the  Kansas  Iknigrant. 

Printed  in  the  ''Herald  of  Freedom,"  at  Lawrence,  Oct.  21,  1854. 

We  cross  the  prairies  as  of  old 

The  Pilgrims  crossed  the  sea, 
To  make  the  West  as  they  the  East 

The  homestead  of  the  free. 

Chorus : 

The  homestead  of  the  free,  my  boys. 
The  homestead  of  the  free. 
To  make  the  West  as  they  the  East 
The  homestead  of  the  free. 

We  go  to  rear  a  wall  of  men 

On  Freedom's  southern  line 
And  plant  beside  the  cotton  tree 

The  rugged  northern  pine. 

We're  flowing  from  our  native  hills, 

As  our  free  rivers  flow; 
The  blessings  of  our  mother-land 

Is  on  us  as  we  go. 

We  go  to  plant  her  common  schools 

On  distant  prairie  swells, 
And  give  the  Sabbaths  of  the  wild 

The  music  of  her  bells. 

Upbearing  like  the  ark  of  old, 

The  Bible  in  her  van 
We  go  to  test  the  truth  of  God 

Against  the  fraud  of  man. 

No  pause,  nor  rest,  save  where  the  streams 

That  feed  the  Kansas  run, 
Save  where  our  pilgrim  gonfalon 

Shall  flout  the  setting  sun. 

7.  The  Herald  of  Freedom,  edited  by  G.  W.  Brown,  was  the  first  Free 
State  paper  published.     The  first  number  was  issued  in  .January,  1855. 

In  1855  there  were  at  least  thirty-five  slaves  in  Doniphan  county. 
Cary  B.  Whitehead  traded  his  farm  in  that  county  for  a  number  of 
slaves,  which  he  afterward  took  to  Missouri.  The  first  issue  of  the  White 
Cloud  "Chief."  Hon.  Sol.  Miller's  paper,  was  printed  on  a  press  operated  by 
a  slave  whom  Mr.  Miller  hired  from  his  owner  for  that  purpose. — C.  E. 
Cory,  7th  Vol.,  Historical  Report. 


78  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

"We'll  tread  the  prairies  as  of  old 

Our  fathers  sailed  the  sea; 
And  make  the  West  as  they  the  East 

The  homestead  of  the  free. 

John  G.  Whittier. 
(Sung  to   the   tune   of   '^Aulcl  Lang   Syne.") 


Eeview  Questions. — What  is  the  derivation  of  the  name  Kansas? 
— What  is  the  boundary  of  Kansas  according  to  the  Organic  Act? — 
What  is  the  title  of  this  act? — Describe  the  population  of  Kansas  at 
the  time  of  the  passage  of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Bill. — Describe  con- 
ditions in  Missouri  and  the  people  across  the  ' '  border. ' ' — What  was 
their  immediate  action  when  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Bill  became  a  law? 
— Who  conceived  the  idea  of  the  New  England  Emigrant  Aid  Society? 
— What  was  the  purpose  and  organization  of  the  society? — Name 
other  slavery  and  anti-slavery  organizations. — Name  three  free  state 
and  three  pro-slavery  towns  that  were  founded  in  1854- '55. — Memo- 
rize the  ''Song  of  the  Kansas  Emigrant.'' 


THE  STRUGGLE  IN  KANSAS. 


CHAPTER    XI. 


GOVEENOR    REEDER'S    ADMINISTRATION. 

July  7,  1854— Sept.  7,  1855. 

72.  First  Territorial  Governor. — Andrew  H.  Reeder/ 
first  Governor  of  the  Territory  of  Kansas,  was  appointed 
by  President  Pierce.  He  arrived  at  Fort  Leavenworth  on 
the  7th  of  October,  1854.  He  was  a  Penn- 
sylvania lawyer  of  high  standing,  but 
had  never  held  public  office.  He  had 
always  been  a  member  of  the  Democratic 
party,  and  thoroughly  endorsed  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Act.  Gov- 
ernor Reeder  received  a  hearty  welcome 
at  Leavenworth,  and  his  reception  was 
quite   as   kindly   at   Lawrence,   which   he 

„  ^  .    .       ^        ^^        '  Gov.     A.     H.     Reeder. 

soon  aiterwards  visited.    He  made  a  tour 

of  observation  through  the  territory  to  inform  himself 

concerning  its  topography  and  population. 

73.  Territorial  and  National  Officials. — The  other  ap- 
pointed officers  of  the  territory  arrived  at  intervals. 
The  Secretary  of  the  Territory  was  Daniel  Woodson,  of 
Virginia.  His  office  was  most  important,  since,  under  the 
organic  act,  he  assumed  in  the  Governor's  absence  all  his 

1.  Governor  Reeder  is  said  to  have  designed  the  territorial  seal.  It 
Is  two  inches  in  diameter  with  a  shield  in  the  center  with  the  motto 
above  it,  "PnpiiU  voce  nata."  It  means  "Born  by  the  voice  of  the  peo- 
ple," or  "Squatter  Sovereignty."  Around  the  shield  are  the  words  :  "Seal 
of  the  Territory  of  Kansas,  Erected  May  ,30,  1854." 

79 


80  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

powers  and  functions.  The  Chief  Justice  of  the  Territory 
was  Samuel  D.  Lecompte,  of  Maryland,  a  strong  pro- 
slavery  advocate. 

Officers  of  significance  in  Kansas  affairs  at  Washington 
were:  Franklin  Pierce,  President  of  the  United  States 
and  signer  of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Act;  D.  R.  Atchison, 
acting  vice-president  of  the  United  States,  and  United 
States  Senator  from  Missouri ;  Jefferson  Davis,  Secretary 
of  War,  and  afterwards  president  of  the  Confederacy; 
and  Stephen  A.  Douglas,  chairman  of  the  Committee  on 
Territories  in  the  Senate. 

74.  First  Election.  Congressional  Delegate. — ^Gov- 
ernor Reeder  issued  his  proclamation  for  an  election  for 
a  delegate  to  Congress  on  the  29th  of  November.  This 
was  the  first  election  held  in  the  territory.  The  candi- 
dates were  Gen.  John  W.  Whitfield,  Pro-slavery;  R.  P. 
Flenniken,  Administration  Democrat,  and  John  A.  Wake- 
field, Free  State.  On  the  day  of  the  election,  as  was 
afterwards  reported  by  an  investigating  committee,  a 
large  number  of  persons  came  over  from  Missouri  and 
voted,  but  General  Whitfield  received  a  legal  plurality. 
As  this  would  have  happened,  and  he  would  have  received 
a  certificate  of  election  without  it,  the  invasion  was  a 
causeless  and  senseless  outrage,  which  had  no  further 
effect  than  to  inflame  the  North,  where  the  determination 
that  Kansas  should  not  be  a  slave  state  was  daily  growing 
more  resolute. 

The  name  which  assumed  the  most  prominence  in  the 
leadership  of  the  Pro-slavery  movement  was  that  of  David 
R.  Atchison. 

75.  First  Census. — In  February,  1855,  Governor  Reeder 


THE    STEUGGLE    IN    KANSAS.  gl 

caused  the  first  census  of  the  territory  to  be  taken.    It 
showed  a  population  of  8,601  persons  and  2,905  voters. 

76.  Second  Election — Territorial  Legislature.— Gov- 
ernor Reeder  divided  the  territory  into  districts,  ap- 
pointed judges  of  election  and  ordered  an  election  for 
a  Territorial  Legislature  to  be  held  March  30,  1855. 

Both  sides  realized  the  importance  of  this  election  and 
strove  for  victory.  The  excitement  in  Missouri  exceeded 
all  previous  experiences.  The  Blue  Lodges?  became  very 
active.  Meetings  were  held  and  money  was  collected  to 
meet  the  expenses  of  those  who  would  go  to  Kansas  to 
control  the  polls. ^  An  invading  force  of  5,000  entered 
the  territory.  They  came  on  horse-back,  in  wagons  and 
carriages,  an  ''unkempt,  sun-dried,  picturesque  mob," 
armed  with  shot-guns,  revolvers,  and  bowie  knives,  and 
generously  supplied  with  whiskey.*  Squads  were  de- 
tached and  sent  to  the  different  voting  places.  The 
judges  of  election  appointed  by  the  Governor  were  driven 
from  the  polling  places  or  forced  to  resign  their  offices.^ 
The  census  of  the  preceding  month  of  February  gave 
Kansas  Territory  2,905  voters.     At  this  March  election 

2.     The  Blue  Lodges  were  secret  proslavery  societies. 

.3.  Mr.  William  Phillips,  a  lawyer  residing  in  Leavenworth,  had  sworn 
a  protest  against  the  validity  of  the  election  in  his  district.  He  was 
taken  into  Missouri,  where  they  shaved  one  side  of  his  head,  tarred  and 
feathered  him,  and  put  him  up  at  auction,  where  a  negro  sold  him  for 
one  dollar.  A  meeting  which  sanctioned  this  action  was  presided  over 
by  a  member  of  the  Proslavery  Kansas  Legislature,  and  the  resolution 
was  offered  by  a  judge  and  member  of  the  House  of  Representatives. 

4.  "I  tell  you  to  mark  every  scoundrel  among  you  that  is  the  least 
tainted  with  free-soilism  or  abolitionism  and  exterminate  him.  Neither 
give  nor  take  quarter.  *  *  *  i  advise  you  one  and  all  to  enter  every 
election  district  in  Kansas,  in  defiance  of  Reeder  and  his  vile  myrmidons 
and  vote  at  the  point  of  the  bowie  knife  and  the  revolver." — General 
Stringfellow  in  an  address  to  Missourians. 

r>.  On  the  wall  of  a  saloon  in  Kansas  City,  Missouri,  was  posted  this 
notice :  "$1,000  reward  for  Ely  Thayer,  the  founder  of  the  New  Eng- 
land Emigrant  Aid   Society." 

The  Missourians  brought  their  tickets  with  them. 


82  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

6,318  votes  were  cast,  of  which  1,410  were  legal  and  4,908 
were  fraudulent.  When  their  votes  were  cast  the  Mis- 
sourians  went  back  to  Missouri. 

77.  Effect  of  Invasion. — The  day  after  this  election 
the  actual  facts  were  known  all  over  the  territory ;  Avithin 
the  week,  in  every  corner  of  the  United  States.  The 
result  was  fuel  to  the  roaring  fire;  every  means  which 
had  been  used  before  in  the  warfai*e  against  slavery  was 
redoubled.  The  betrayed  people  who  had  gone  to  the 
territory  under  the  implied  promise  of  the  Kansas- 
Nebraska  Act,*^  that  the  people  of  the  territories  should 
be  allowed  to  regulate  their  institutions  in  their  own 
way,  became  throughout  the  Free  States  the  objects  of 
boundless  sympathy.  The  incidents  of  the  invasion  of 
March  30  were  told  in  song  and  story,  by  artist's  pencil, 
and  by  press  and  pulpit,  and  the  Free  State  emigrants, 
with  increasing  vigor  and  numbers,  pressed  into  the  Ter- 
ritory of  Kansas. 

78.  Governor  Reeder's  Action. — In  six  out  of  eighteen 
districts,  Governor  Keeder  set  aside  the  elections  for 
informality,  and  ordered  an  election  to  be  held  May  22 
to  fill  vacancies.  He  removed  his  office  from  Fort  Leaven- 
worth to  the  Shawnee  Manual  Labor  School,  two  miles 
west  of  Westport,  Missouri,  and  ordered  the  first  Legis- 
lature of  the  territory  to  convene  at  Pawnee,  a  town 
which  had  been  laid  out  near  Fort  Riley.  After  his 
decision  in  regard  to  the  elections,  and  his  proclamation 
for  the  meeting  of  the  Legislature,  Governor  Reeder  went 

G.  The  Freo  State  men  had  come  to  the  Territory  unarmed,  but  after 
the  Missouri  invasions,  arms  were  sent  for  in  self-defense  against  the 
ruffians.     Sharp's  rifles  were  sent  them  in  boxes  marlted  "Booiis." 


THE    STRUGGLE    IN    KANSAS. 


83 


East  to  meet  charges  which  the  Pro-slavery  leaders  had 
made  in  asking  his  removal/ 


^^^^.. 


•^. 


First   Territorial   Capitol,    Pawnee,    1855. 

79.  Election  of  May  22.— At  the  election  to  fill  vacan- 
cies in  the  legislature,  caused  by  the  Governor's  refusal 
to  sanction  the  unlawful  voting  in  certain  districts,  the 
Pro-slavery  voters  neither  in  the  territory  nor  in  Mis- 
souri took  part.    The  Free  State  voters  alone  participated. 

80.  First  Legislature — Pawnee. — The  members  of  the 
Legislature  met  at  Pawnee  on  July  2,  1855.  The  Pawnee 
town  company  had  erected  a  stone  building  for  the  use 
of  the  law-makers. 

The  Legislature  came,  went  into  camp,    remained  four 


7.     The   walls   of   the    legislative   building   still    stand   in    sight   of   the 
Union  Pacific  railroad  track  a  few  miles  east  of  Fort  Riley. 


34  HISTOEY  or  KANSAS. 

days,^  unseated  the  Free  State  members,  seated  the  mem- 
bers declared  elected  on  the  30th  of  March,  and  passed 
a  bill  ''to  remove  the  capital  temporarily  to  Shawnee 
Manual  Labor  School."  This  act  was  vetoed  by  the 
Governor,  it  passed  over  his  veto,  and  the  Legislature 
adjourned. 

81.  Governor  Reeder  Removed. — On  the  re-assembling 
of  the  Legislature  at  the  Shawnee  Manual  Labor  School, 
Governor  Reeder  informed  the  body  that  it  was  in  ses- 
sion where  it  had  no  right  to  be,  in  contravention  of  the 
Act  of  Congress,  and  that  he  could  give  no  sanction  to 
any  act  that  it  might  pass. 

The  Legislature,  in  both  branches,  memorialized  the 
President  of  the  United  States  to  remove  Governor 
Reeder.  On  the  31st  of  July  his  removal  was  officially 
announced,  and  on  the  16th  of  August  the  Governor 
reported  his  removal  to  the  Legislature.  So  ended  the 
term  of  the  first  territorial  Governor  of  Kansas.  He  had 
served  eleven  months. 

82.  Woodson  Acting  Governor. — The  departure  of 
Governor  Reeder  made  Secretary  Woodson  acting  Gov- 
ernor. His  signature  is  affixed  to  all  laws  passed  by 
what  the  Free  State  party  called  the  "Bogus  Legisla- 
ture." 

83.  Acts  of  Shawnee  Legislature. — The  first  Legisla- 
ture reassembled  at  Shawnee  and  adopted  as  a  system 
of  laws  the  Missouri  statutes,  adding  thereto  a  series 
of   "black   laws"   exceeding   in   ferocity   anything   ever 

8.  Rev.  Thomas  .Johnson  states  that  "nearly  all  the  members  of  the 
legislature  had  to  camp  out  in  the  open  sun.  and  do  their  own  cooking 
without  a  shade  tree  to  protect  them,  for  there  were  no  boarding  houses 
in  the  neighborhood  excepting  two  unfinished  shanties.  The  gentry  came 
prepared  for  roughing  it,  as  they  brought  an  unprecedented  assortment  of 
legislatorial  fixtures,  pots,  kettles,   sauce  pans,  provisions  and  tents." 


THE    STRUGGLE    IN    KANSAS.  85 

known  in  the  United  States.  A  large  number  of  counties 
were  organized ;  Lecompton  was  fixed  upon  as  the  terri- 
torial seat  of  government,  and  a  provision  was  made  that 
every  officer  in  the  territory,  executive  and  judicial,  was 
to  be  appointed  by  the  Legislature  or  by  some  officer  of 
the  Legislature.^ 

84.  Mob  Violence  at  Atchison. — During  the  spring  and 
summer  of  1855  there  was  much  disturbance.  Many  of 
the  collisions  were  doubtless  incited  by  private  and  per- 
sonal enmity,  but  the  outrages  which  created  the  most 
profound  impression  throughout  the  country  were  those 
committed  for  opinion's  sake.  Rev.  Pardee  Butler  was 
seized  at  Atchison,  in  August,  and  sent  down  the  river 
on  a  raft  made  of  two  logs,  with  many  circumstances  of 
injury  and  insult.  Returning  the  following  spring,  he 
was  stripped,  tarred,  and  covered  with  cotton.  He  was 
a  peaceable  settler  of  the  county,  he  had  only  expressed 
his  opinion  upon  a  question  which,  under  the  Kansas- 
Nebraska  Act,  was  left  to  the  determination  of  the  lawful 
voters  of  the  territory.  His  story  was  told  all  through 
the  North  and  roused  a  determination  of  resistance. 
While  Pardee  Butler  was  going  down  the  river  on  his 
raft,  John  Brown  was  moving  along  the  road  to  Kansas 
with  his  rifle. 

9,  As  an  example  of  some  of  the  laws  formed  :  It  was  enacted  that 
the  death  penalty  should  be  inflicted  in  the  case  of  one  who  should  entice, 
decoy,  or  carry  away  any  slave  with  intent  to  procure  his  freedom.  To 
question  the  right  of  slave-holding  meant  felony  and  imprisonment  with 
hard  labor.  A  citizen  could  be  disfranchised  who  refused  to  take  oath  to 
support  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law.  The  "freedom  of  the  press"  was  vio- 
lated. If  one  should  assert  that  persons  had  not  the  right  to  hold  slaves 
in  the  Territory  or  caused  to  be  introduced  or  printed  any  denial  of  the 
right  to  hold  slaves,  such  a  one  would  be  deemed  guilty  of  felony  and 
punished  by  imprisonment  at  hard  labor  for  a  term  of  not  less  than  two 
years.     Free  State  men  were  denied  the  right  to  hold  office. 

It  was  provided  that  "hard  labor"  should  be  with  heavy  ball  and 
chain  locked  to  the  ankles  and  on  public  roads  or  buildings,  and  that  the 
convicts  could  be  hired  out  to  private  parties. 


THE    STKUGGLE    IN    KANSAS.  §7 

Review  Questions. — Give  the  dates  of  Governor  Eeecler  's  Admin- 
istration.— What  had  been  his  experience,  and  what  was  his  attitude 
with  regard  to  Kansas  affairs  when  he  came  to  the  Territory? — Who 
were  the  territorial  and  national  officials  that  had  supreme  control  in 
Kansas? — What  was  their  attitude? — What  was  the  purpose  and 
result  of  the  first  election  held  in  Kansas  territory? — What  was  the 
first  census  report? — Describe  the  election  of  the  first  Territorial 
Legislature. — What  was  the  effect  of  the  ''Invasion"? — Note  Gov- 
ernor Eeeder  's  action  and  the  resulting  May  election. — Locate  Pawnee 
and  Shawnee. — Enumerate  the  significant  acts  of  the  first  Legislature. 
— Give  reasons  for  the  removal  of  Governor  Eeeder. — What  were  the 
"black  laws"? — Why  was  the  first  Legislature  called  the  ''bogus 
Legislature"? — Do  you  approve  of  Governor  Eeeder 's  action  during 
his  administration? 


THE  REIGN  OF  VIOLENCE. 


CHAPTER    XII. 


GOVERNOR    SHANNON'S   ADMINISTRATION. 

Sept.  7,  1855— Sept.  9,  1856. 

85.  Second  Territorial  Governor. — In  September,  1855, 
Wilson  Shannon,  of  Ohio,  Second  Territorial  Governor  of 
Kansas,  appeared  at  Westport,  Missouri.  Unlike  Gov- 
ernor Reeder,  Governor  Shannon  had  been  much  in  pub- 
lic life.  He  had  been  Governor  of  Ohio,  United  States 
Minister  to  Mexico,  and  member  of  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives, where  he  had  voted  for  the  Kansas-Nebraska 
Act. 

THE  TOPEKA  MOVEMENT. 

86.  Origin. — After  the  first  two  elections  and  the  inva- 
sions from  Missouri,  it  was  a  question  among  the  Free 
State  people  what  was  to  be  done  that 
Kansans  might  have  their  rights  as 
American  citizens  recognized.  Dr. 
Charles  Robinson  was  a  sagacious  and 
conservative  leader,  and  to  him  the 
people  turned.  He  decided  that  the 
wisest  move  would  be  to  ignore  the 
''bogus  territorial  legislature,"  adopt 
a  state  constitution  and  apply  for  ad- 
mission into  the  Union.  Accordingly  ^""^'•°°'-  ^"^«"  ^'^°°"°- 
meetings  were  held  to  spread  the  idea  among  the  people 
and  unite  them  for  service.    The  most  significant  meeting 


THE    REIGN    OF    VIOLENCE.  89 

was  that  at  Big  Springs  in  October,  1855.  James  H. 
Lane,  a  politician  from  Indiana,  was  there.  Ex-governor 
Reeder  gave  a  stirring  address.  Since  his  removal  from 
office  he  had  thrown  heart  and  soul  into  the  Free  State 
movement  and  was  a  great  help  both  inside  and  outside 
the  territory.  The  effort  was  the  beginning  of  the  Free 
State  Party  and  the  movement  which  resulted  in  the 
Topeka  Constitutional  Convention. 

87.  Topeka  Constitutional  Convention. — Delegates  to 
the  Topeka  Constitutional  Convention  were  elected  Octo- 
ber 9,  1855.     The  Convention  met  on  the  23d  of  October 
and  completed  the  Topeka  Constitu- 
tion, the  first  constitution  of  Kansas, 
on  the  11th  of  November.     The  con- 
stitution was  submitted  to  a  vote  of 
the  people  on  the  15th  of  December. 
At  Leavenworth  the  poll  books  were 
destroyed  by  a  Pro-slavery  mob,  and 
also  the  office  of  a  Free  State  news- 
paper.   Outside  of  Leavenworth  1,731 

,  i     J?         j_i  j'l     i-  James  H.  Lane. 

votes  were  cast  ror  the  constitution, 
and  46   against   it.     The  Pro-slavery  people   refused  to 
vote  at  both  of  these  elections.    The  Topeka  Constitution 
provided,   "There  shall  be  no  slavery  in  this  State,  or 
involuntary  servitude  except  for  crime." 

88.  Election  of  Congressional  Delegate. — On  October 
1,  an  election  for  delegate  in  Congress  was  held.  The 
Free  State  voters  took  no  part  in  the  election,  and  John 
W.  Whitfield  received  2,721  votes.  On  October  9  the 
Free  State  voters  cast  2,849  votes  for  Andrew  H.  Reeder. 
Congress  refused  to  seat  either  contestant. 


90  HISTORY  OP  KANSAS. 

JHE    WAKARUSA    WAR. 

89.  Cause. — The  unity  of  the  Free  State  people  in  the 
Topeka  movement  was  a  constant  irritation  to  the  Mis- 
souri party  even  though  they  knew  that  they  had  in  their 
favor  the  President  of  the  United  States,  the  Governor, 
and  the  Territorial  Legislature. 

The  Free  State  leaders  were  very  careful  to  violate 
no  law  of  the  United  States,  and  holding  themselves  in 
quiet  reserve  awaited  the  result  of  the  Topeka  movement. 

November  21,  1855,  a  crisis  came  in  the  murder  of 
Charles  M.  Dow,  a  Free  State  settler,  by  F.  M.  Coleman, 
a  Pro-slavery  advocate,  at  Hickory  Point  about  ten  miles 
south  of  Lawrence.  Dow  was  a  young  Democrat  of  high 
standing  in  the  community  who  had  made  his  home  with 
Jacob  Branson,  a  farmer.  When  it  was  found  that  he  was 
murdered  for  his  principles  rather  than  for  anything  that 
he  had  done,  indignation  knew  no  bounds.  Dow  was 
buried  by  his  Free  State  friends,  who  declared  that  they 
would  ferret  out  the  murderer  and  his  accomplices.  That 
night,  Coleman  fled  to  Shawnee.  No  effort  whatever  was 
made  by  the  authorities  to  bring  him  to  justice.  Though 
the  Free  State  leaders  tried  to  prevent  it,  someone  burned 
Coleman's  cabin,  and  he  "swore  his  life"  against  Dow's 
friend,  Jacob  Branson.  On  the  night  of  November  26,  a 
band  of  Free  State  people  had  gathered  together  at  the 
scene  of  the  murder.  While  they  were  there  Sheriff 
Jones  (who,  though  a  resident  of  Missouri,  was  by  ap- 
pointment of  the  Territorial  Legislature  Sheriff  of 
Douglas  County)  went  to  Branson's  home  with  a  posse 
and  took  him  into  custody.     The  Free  State  men  came 


THE    EEIGN    OF    VIOLENCE.  91 

to  ask  for  Branson,  and  were  informed  that  he  had  been 
taken  away  by  a  band  of  armed  men.  In  the  search,  they 
came  upon  Sheriff  Jones  with  his  men  at  Brandon's 
Bridge,  and  demanded  and  secured  Branson's  release. 

90.  The  Events  of  the  War.— Sheriff  Jones,  in  high 
dudgeon,  rode  to  Franklin,  a  Pro-slavery  outpost,  dis- 
patched a  messenger  to  Missouri,  and  notified  Governor 
Shannon  that  a  rebellion  had  broken  out  in  the  Territory 
and  that  3,000  men  were  required  to  suppress  it.  The 
Governor  believed  the  report,  ordered  Generals  Richard- 
son and  Strickler  of  the  territorial  militia  to  march  to 
Lecompton  and  report  to  the  sheriff  with  all  the  force  they 
could  collect.  In  the  meantime,  the  Missouri  border  was 
stirred  with  appeals,  and  a  large  force  raised  to  organize 
another  invasion. 

A  formidable  Pro-slavery  party  consisting  of  1,500  men 
gathered  at  Franklin,  marched  up  to  Lawrence,  and  went 
into  camp  on  the  banks  of  the  Wakarusa.  They  were 
a  rough  crowd  of  adventurers.  Free  State  companies 
gathered  from  the  vicinity  and  joined  the  garrison  at 
Lawrence,  where  defenses  were  prepared  under  the  direc- 
tion of  Robinson  with  Lane  second  in  command.^  Law- 
rence had  600  defenders.  General  Easton,  editor  of  the 
Pro-slavery  "Kansas  Herald,"  reconnoitered  the  town,  ad- 

1.  Mrs.  Robinson  tells  of  the  ladies'  part  in  the  defense :  "Mrs. 
Wood,  whose  hushand  has  ever  been  most  active  in  the  free-state  cause, 
and  for  whom  the  enemy  feel  no  little  bitterness,  has  offered  her  little 
shake  cabin  next  the  hotel  for  the  general  use.  Daily  and  nightly  the 
ladies  meet  there  in  the  one  room,  with  its  loose  open  floor  through 
which  the  wind  creeps,  to  make  cartridges,  their  nimble  fingers  keeping 
time  with  each  heart  beat  for  freedom,  so  enthusiastic  are  they  in  aiding 
the  defense." 

Mrs.  Samuel  N.  Wood  and  Mrs.  George  W.  Brown  of  Lawrence  went 
out  six  miles  from  the  town  and  brought  in  two  kegs  of  powder  hidden 
in  the  voluminous  folds  of  their  fashionable  dresses.  The  invaders 
halted  them,  but  finding  that  they  were  ladies  released  them  and  allowed 
them  to  go  on  their  way. 


92  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

vised  Governor  Shannon  that  it  was  well  fortified,  and 
recommended  a  call  for  the  United  States  troops  at 
Leavenworth.  The  governor  acted  accordingly,  but 
Colonel  Sumner,  who  was  in  command,  refused  to  respond 
without  orders  from  Washington.  Finally  two  men  from 
Lawrence  contrived  to  get  through  the  enemies'  lines  and 
communicate  with  Governor  Shannon.  They  found  him 
entirely  deceived  as  to  conditions.  Thinking  the  Free  State 
people  a  band  of  outlaws  he  was  bent  on  depriving  them  of 
their  arms  which  they  had  a  constitutional  right  to  carry. 
Governor  Shannon  visited  the  camp  of  the  Missourians 
and  then  Lawrence,  and  finding  that  the  Lawrence  people 
were  in  the  right,  and  alarmed  at  the  lawless  host  he  had 
collected,  succeeded  in  dispersing  the  Missourians,  to  the 
chagrin  of  Sheriff  Jones.  The  Governor  affixed  his  signa- 
ture to  a  treaty  of  peace  signed  by  Dr.  Kobinson  and 
James  Lane.  A  few  evenings  later,  these  gentlemen,  ex- 
cepting the  Governor,  met  many  of  the  leaders  of  both 
sides  at  an  evening  party  given  by  the  ladies  of  Law- 
rence.^   Even  Sheriff  Jones  was  an  invited  guest. 

2.  The  party  was  given  that  the  governor  and  his  friends  might  find 
that  the  Lawrence  people  were  not  a  set  of  outlaws  but  cultivated,  loyal, 
American  citizens. 

When  the  voting  commenced,  the  legality  of  a  vote  of  a  Mr. 
Page  was  raised.  Before  it  was  decided,  Colonel  Samuel  Young 
stepped  up  to  the  window  and  said  he  would  settle  the  matter.  The 
vote  of  Mr.  Page  was  withdrawn,  and  Colonel  Young  offered  to  vote.  He 
refused  to  take  the  oath  prescribed  by  the  Governor,  but  swore  that  ho 
was  a  resident  of  the  territory,  upon  which  his  oath  was  received.  He 
told  one  of  the  judges,  when  asked  if  he  intended  to  make  Kansas  his 
future  home  that  it  was  none  of  his  business,  that  if  he  were  a  resident 
then  he  should  be  asked  no  more.  After  his  vote  was  received  Colonel 
Young  got  up  on  the  window-sill  and  announced  to  the  crowd  that  he  had 
been  permitted  to  vote  and  they  could  all  come  up  and  vote.  "The  polls 
were  so  crowded  that  for  a  time  when  the  men  had  voted  they  were 
obliged  to  get  out  by  being  hoisted  up  on  the  roof  of  the  building  and 
passing  out  over  the  house." — The  Kansas  Conflict. 

"At  Bloomington  there  was  an  exceptionally  successful  bedlam.  The 
judges  exhibited  obstinacy  which  yielded  only  to  an  active  revolver  and 
bowie  knife  treatment.  *  *  *  jt  was  intimated  that  their  resigna- 
tions   would    be    accepted- — a    hint    which    they    neglected    to    act    upon. 


THE    REIGN    OF    VIOLENCE.  93 

91.  Thomas  W.  Barber  a  Martyr. — But  the  ' '  Wakarusa 
War"  was  not  destined  to  end  without  bloodshed. 
Thomas  W.  Barber,  a  young  man,  who  had  been  among 
the  defenders  of  Lawrence,  was  on  his  way  home  with  two 
friends,  when  they  were  confronted  by  two  horsemen, 
who  detached  themselves  from  another  party,  and  Barber 
was  killed.  Murders  had  not  been  uncommon,  but  this 
excited  unusual  horror.  The  funeral  of  Barber  was  at- 
tended by  every  demonstration  of  respect,  Charles  Robin- 
son and  James  H.  Lane  speaking  beside  the  coffin. 

Whittier  afterwards  wrote  the  "Burial  of  Barber:" 

Not  in  vain  a  heart  shall  break, 
Not  a  tear  for  freedom  's  sake 
Fall  unheeded;   God  is  true. 

The  Kansas  county  of  Barber  commemorates  his  name. 

92.  The  Winter  of  '55  and  '56.— The  winter  of  '55  and 
'56  was  a  very  severe  one.  The  pioneers  in  their  little 
cabins  were  unprepared  for  it,  and  many  suffered  intense- 
ly- not  only  from  cold,  but  also  from  hunger. 

THE  TOPIiKA  MOVEMENT  CONTINUED. 

93.  Election  of  State  Officers.— The  Free  State  party 
continuing  its  tentative  government,  on  January  15,  1856, 
elected  state  officers  and  chose  Dr.  Charles  Robinson 
governor. 

94.  Session  of  Topeka  Legislature. — On  the  4th  of 
March,  1856,  the  first  session  of  the  Topeka  legislature 

Finally,  to  expedite  affairs  a  borderer  drew  his  watch  and  announced  a 
five  minute  period  of  grace — then  resignations  or  death.  The  five  min- 
utes expired  and  nothing  had  been  done.  An  extension  of  one  minute  was 
allowed,    during   which   the  judges   decamped." — Spring. 

Samuel  .Tones,  afterward  known  as  "Sheriff  Jones,"  led  the  crowd  at 
Bloomington. 


94  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

was  held.  Dr.  Robinson  presented  a  message,  and  James 
H.  Lane  and  Andrew  H.  Reeder  were  chosen  United 
States  Senators.  A  memorial  was  prepared  asking  ad- 
mission into  the  Union.  The  legislature  adjourned  to 
meet  July  4. 

95.  Topeka  Constitution  in  Congress.— The  Topeka 
Constitution  was  presented  in  the  Senate  of  the  United 
States  by  Lewis  Cass  and  in  the  House  by  Honorable 
Daniel  Mace  of  Indiana.  On  the  3d  of  July,  1856,  the 
House  of  Representatives  passed  a  bill  for  the  admission 
of  Kansas  under  the  Topeka  Constitution  by  a  vote  of 
ninety-nine  to  ninety-seven.  The  opposition  of  the  Senate 
to  any  free  Constitution  was  invincible,  and  there  the 
Topeka  Constitution  failed  to  receive  the  required  num- 
ber of  votes. 

96.  The  Territorial  Judiciary. — The  Judiciary  of  the 
Territory  was  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  enemies  of  the 
Free  State  party.  An  act  by  the  Territorial  Legislature 
provided  ''that  no  person  conscientiously  opposed  to  the 
holding  of  slaves,  or, not  admitting  the  right  to  hold 
slaves  in  this  Territory  should  be  a  *juror  in  a  case  in- 
volving the  right  to  such  property."  Chief  Justice  Le- 
compte  and  Judge  Cato  were  the  most  prominent  judges. 
They  were  both  in  sympathy  with  the  Missouri  party. 

97.  Arrest  of  the  Free  State  Leaders. — In  May  the 
grand  jury  of  Douglas  County  under  the  instruction  of 
Judge  Lecompte,  began  its  session  at  Lecompton. 

The  "treason-suppression"  program  was  advanced.  Ex- 
governor  Reeder,  Dr.  Charles  Robinson,^  and  many  others 

3.  Dr.  Robinson  had  started  east  with  Mrs.  Robinson  to  confer  with 
friends  of  his  cause  and  to  put  the  report  of  the  investigating  committee 


THE    EEIGN    OF    VIOLENCE.  95 

were  indicted  for  high  treason.  Ex-governor  Reeder* 
was  in  the  Territory  in  attendance  on  the  Congressional 
Investigation  Committee.  He  refused  arrest  and  made 
his  way  to  Kansas  City,  Missouri,  whence  he  escaped  in 
disguise  down  the  Missouri  on  the  deck  of  a  steamboat.'' 
Dr.  Robinson  was  arrested  while  traveling  with  Mrs. 
Robinson,  at  Lexington,  Missouri.  He  was  brought  back 
to  Lecompton  and  held  a  prisoner  for  four  months. 

THE  SACK  OF  LAWEENCE. 

98.  Conditions  and  Causes. — Word  came  frequently 
to  the  settlers  at  Lawrence  that  an  attack  on  the  town 
was  being  planned  in  Missouri.^  Telegrams  were  sent  to 
the  President  and  to  Congress  asking  for  protection,  but 
no  protection  was  afforded.  Well  might  the  town  of 
Lawrence  be  concerned  for  its  safety.     Its  leaders  who 

in  safe  hands.  At  Lexington  he  was  seized  and  detained  until  legal 
papers  could  be  obtained  from  Kansas.  Colonel  Preston  started  with  his 
prisoner  to  Lecompton.  Governor  Shannon,  fearing  a  rescue  at  Xaw- 
rence,  halted  the  party  at  Franklin,  and  sent  them  to  Leavenworth,  where 
Governor  Robinson  barely  escaped  a  mob.  Later  he  was  taken  to  Le- 
compton and  confined  with  other  Free  State  prisoners  a  part  of  the  time 
in  a  log  hut  and  at  other  times  in  a  tent.  The  place  of  confinement 
was  called  the  "Bastile  of  the  Prairies."  Mrs.  Robinson,  after  her  return 
from  the  east,   joined  him  here. 

4.  Reeder  escaped  disguised  as  a  wood-chopper.  He  wore  a  blue  jean 
suit,  a  battered  felt  hat,  smoked  an  old  clay  pipe,  and  carried  an  ax  over 
his  shoulder.  He  walked  through  the  crowds  at  the  hotel  undetected, 
and  was  rowed  down  the  river  to  an  out-of-the-way  landing,  where  a 
friendly  captain  took  him  on  board.  "Get  aboard,  you  old  scallawag.  1 
won't  wait  two  minutes  for  you,"  shouted  the  captain,  simulating  gruff- 
ness  as  Reeder  clambered  on  board. 

5.  Governor  Reeder  had  many  valuable  papers,  which,  although  dis- 
guised, he  dared  not  carry  out  of  Kansas  on  his  person,  nor  was  there 
any  of  his  men  who  dared  to  do  it  for  him.  Helen  M.  Hutchinson,  a 
brave  woman,  concealed  the  papers  and  took  them  safely  out  of  the 
state,  although  she  was  intercepted  bv  ruffians  on  the  road. 

Fort  Riley  was  built  in  1855.  In  1899,  upon  the  solicitation  of 
General  Sheridan,  the  Government  began  the  reconstruction  of  the  Fort. 
It  is  now  a  beautiful  place,  a  school  for  artillery  and  cavalry. 

7.  Missouri  received  constant  accessions  from  the  proslavery  country, 
band.s  coming  from  as  far  away  as  South  Carolina.  Buford,  of  Alabama, 
issued  a  call  for  .300  men,  olfering  by  way  of  inducement,  transportation, 
support  for  a  year,  and  the  satisfaction  of  a  chance  at  an  abolitionist. 


96  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

had  served  so  long  and  faithfully  had  been  imprisoned 
or  driven  out  of  the  state.    It  stood  alone  and  helpless. 

Sheriff  Jones,  who  had  never  recovered  from  his  defeat 
in  the  Wakarusa  War,  made  himself  so  obnoxious  in  his 
arrest  of  Free  State  men  that  he  was  shot  and  wounded, 
but  not  fatally,  by  a  youth  of  Lawrence.  The  act,  though 
repudiated  by  the  citizens  who  offered  to  assist  in  finding 
the  guilty  party,  was  held  against  the  town.  The  affair 
created  great  excitement  in  Missouri,  where  Jones  was 
considered  a  hero,  and  it  was  declared  that  Lawrence, 
"that  foul  blot  on  the  soil  of  Kansas,"  must  be  removed. 
As  a  result  the  grand  jury  of  Douglas  County  found 
bills  of  indictment  against  the  Free  State  newspapers — 
the  "Herald  of  Freedom"  and  the  "Kansas  Free  State" 
— and  against  the  principal  hotel  of  Lawrence. 

99.  Events. — To  carry  out  the  ruling  of  the  Grand 
Jury,  Marshal  Donaldson  issued  a  call  to  towns  on  the 
border  to  rally  at  Lecompton.  Another  wild  lawless  crowd 
assembled  under  the  leadership  of  Sheriff  Jones  and 
General  Atchison.  On  the  21st  of  May,  1856,  they  en- 
tered Lawrence  with  800  cavalry  and  infantry  and  two 
cannon,  burned  and  battered  down  the  Free  State  Hotel, 
destroyed  the  offices  of  the  newspapers,  and  threw  the 
presses  into  the  river.  On  the  ruins  of  the  office  of  the 
"Herald  of  Freedom,"  they  planted  a  blood-red  flag 
bearing  a  lone  star  and  the  words  "South  Carolina  and 
Southern  Rights."^  Stores  were  broken  into  and  robbed, 
and  Dr.  Robinson's  house  was  burned.^ 

8.  The  South  Carolina  flag  is  now  in  the  possession  of  the  Kansas 
State  Historical,  Society  at  Topeka. 

9.  T.  H.  Gladstone,  correspondent  of  the  London  Times,  and  a  relative 
of  England's  great  statesman,  was  at  Kansas  City  when  the  mob  returned 
from    the    Saclt    of   Lawrence.      He    describes   the   scene    thus :      "I    shall 


THE    EEIGN    OF    VIOLENCE.  97 

100.  A  Reign  of  Terror. — At  last  the  demons  of  war 
were  loose.  Dr.  Robinson  and  his  co-laborers  had  shun- 
ned violence  and  had  always  counseled  no  bloodshed, 
and  a  careful  observance  of  the  federal  laws,  but  after 
the  arrest  of  the  Free  State  leaders  and  the  sack  of 
Lawrence  the  territory  was  "plunged  into  chaos";  a 
reign  of  terror  began. 

John  Brown  now  became  prominent  in  Kansas  affairs. 
He  felt  that  he  had  a  divinely  appointed  mission  to  free 
the  slaves.  Spring  says  of  him  that  whatever  else  may  be 
laid  to  his  charge — whatever  rashness,  unwisdom,  or 
bloodiness — no  faintest  trace  of  self-seeking  stains  his 
Kansas  life.  ''In  behalf  of  the  cause  which  fascinated 
and  ruled  him  he  was  prepared  to  sacrifice  his  enemies, 

never  forget  the  appearance  of  the  lawless  mob  that  poured  into  the 
place,  inflamd  with  drink,  glutted  with  indulgence  of  the  vilest  passions, 
displaying  with  loud  boasts  the  plunder  they  had  taken  from  the  inhab- 
itants, and  thirsty  for  the  opportunity  of  repeating  the  Sack  of  Lawrence 
in  some  other  offending  place.  Men  for  the  most  part  of  large  frame, 
with  red  flannel  shirts  and  immense  boots  worn  outside  their  trousers, 
their  faces  unwashed  and  unshaven,  still  reeking  with  the  dust  and 
smoke  of  Lawrence,  wearing  the  most  savage  Woks  and  giving  utterance 
to  the  most  horrible  imprecations  and  blasphemies ;  armed  moreover  to 
the  teeth  with  rifles  and  revolvers,  cntlasses  and  bowie  knives — such 
were  the  men  I  saw  around  me.  Some  displayed  a  gross  intermixture 
in  their  dress,  having  crossed  the  native  red  rough  shirt  with  satin  vest 
or  narrow  dress  coat  pillaged  from  the  wardrobe  of  some  Lawrence 
Yankee  or  having  girded  themselves  with  cords  and  tassels  which  the 
day  before  had  ornamented  the  cnrtains  of  the  Free  State  Hotel.  Look- 
ing around  at  these  groups  of  drunken,  bellowing,  bloodthirsty  demons, 
who  crowded  around  the  bar  of  the  hotel  shouting  for  drink,  or  vented 
their  furious  noise  on  the  levee  without,  I  felt  that  all  my  former  expe- 
rience of  border  men  and  Missourians  bore  faint  comparison  with  tlie 
spectacle  presented  by  this  wretched  crew,  who  appeared  only  the  more 
terrifying  from  the  darkness  of  the  surrounding  night.  A  *  number  of 
these  men  became  my  companions  for  the  night  as  I  went  up  by  one  of 
the  Missouri  steamboats  from  Kansas  City  to" Leavenworth  City.  I  found 
on  the  upper  deck  the  few  more  gentlemanly  persons  to  whom  I  had 
referred.  One  or  two  appeared  to  be  TTnited  States  oflicers,  men  of  edu- 
cation and  refinement.  Another,  a  gentleman  more  advanced  in  years, 
held  himself  somewhat  apart,  and  appeared  engaged  in  anxious  thought. 
He  had  an  eye  full  of  bright  intelligence  and  wore  the  aspect  of  one 
who  was  superior  to  those  around  him.  To  my  astonishment  I  per- 
ceived that  the  older  gentleman  was  a  pi'isoner.  In  reply  to  inquiry  by 
many  the  answer  was  given,  'It's  Governor  Robinson  being  brought  round 
from  Lawrence  by  way  of  Kansas  City.'  " 


98  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

and  if  the  offering  proved  inadequate,  to  sacrifice  him- 
self." 

101.  Pottawatomie  Massacre. — It  was  reported  to  John 
Brown,  that  Pro-slavery  men  of  Pottawatomie  Creek  were 
attempting  to  force  people  who  were  obnoxious  to  them 
from  the  country  and  he  with  a  company  of  seven  or 
eight  men  went  up  to  Dutch  Henry's  crossing  and  at- 
tacked the  homes  of  the  Pro-slavery  settlers,  May  24, 
1856.  James  P.  Doyle,  his  two  sons,  William  Sherman, 
commonly  called  "Dutch  Henry,"  and  Allen  Wilkinson, 
a  member  of  the  Shawnee  legislature,  were  called  out  of 
their  cabins  and  killed. ^^ 

102.  Black  Jack. — The  whole  country  now  became  the 
prey  of  marauding  parties  of  both  sides.  Homes  were 
desecrated,  crops  destroyed,  and  towns  pillaged.  Captain 
Pate,  who  had  taken  part  in  the  siege  of  Lawrence,  on 
hearing  of  the  Pottawatomie  Massacre,  started  to  capture 
Brown,  but  Brown  captured  him  and  twenty-eight  of  his 
men  at  Black  Jack  and  kept  them  prisoners. 

103.  Palmyra. — The  Missouri  border  rushed  into  the 
territory.  AVhitfield,  delegate  to  Congress,  was  made 
leader.  They  planned  to  unite  with  Pate  and  drive  every 
abolitionist  from  the  country.  The  Free  State  leaders 
also  became  active  and  concentrated  their  forces  at 
Palmyra.  The  two  armies  stood  face  to  face  June  5. 
Governor  Shannon  then  became  alarmed,  and  ordered 
the  United  States  troops  to  the  rescue.  Colonel  Sumner 
responded,  sent  the  belligerent  parties  home,  and  released 

10.  "The  men  killed  had  been  our  neighbors  and  I  was  sufficiently  ac- 
quainted with  their  characters  to  know  that  they  were  of  the  stock  from 
which  came  the  Jam^s  brothers  and  the  Youngers,  who  never  shrank 
from  perpetrating  crime  if  it  was  done  in  the  interest  of  the  proslavery 
cause." — August   Bondi. 


THE    EEIGN    OF    VIOLENCE. 


99 


the  prisoners.     On  the  way  back  to  Missouri,  Whitfield's 
party  plundered  Osawatomie. 

104.  Disbanding-  of  the  Topeka  Legislature. — In  spite 
of  the  fact  that  the  Topeka  Constitution  was  admitted 
into  Congress  and  that  a  bill  was  passed  for  its  adoption 
in  the  House  of  Representatives,  the  administrations  of 
President  Pierco  and  those  in  control  in  Kansas  Terri- 
tory took  the  position  that  adherence  to  the  Topeka  gov- 
ernment or  non-obedience  to  the  Shawnee-Mission  Legis- 
lature constituted  some  form  of  treason  and  insurrection. 
On  the  reassembling  of  the  Legislature  at  Topeka,  July 
4,  1856,  Colonel  E.  V.  Sumner,  of  the  National  Forces, 
accompanied  by  United  States  Marshal  Donaldson,  ap- 
peared with  five  companies  of  United 
States  dragoons  and  two  pieces  of 
artillery.  Entering  the  Senate  and- 
House  Colonel  Sumner  ordered  the 
Legislature  to  disperse.  He  was 
obeyed.  Governor  Shannon  was  out 
of  the  Territory.  Colonel  Sumner^^ 
acted  under  the  orders  of  Acting- 
Governor  Woodson  and  Secretary  of 

Colonel    E.    V.    Sumner.         ^Yar,   JcffcrSOU   Davis. 

Colonel  Sumner  said,  "Gentlemen,  I  am  called  upon 
this  day  to  perform  the  most  painful  duty  of  my  whole 
life.  God  knows  that  I  have  no  party  feeling  in  this 
matter  and  will  hold  none  as  long  as  I  occupy  my  present 
position  in  Kansas. ' '  Because  of  his  considerate  conduct ' 
he  was  given  three  cheers  by  the  Legislature. ^- 

11.  Colonel  Sumner  was  soon  afterward  relieved  of  his  command  by 
the  administration  at  Washington.  I'ersifer  1.  Smith,  an  ardent  advocate 
of   proslavery,    succeeded    him. 

12.  "The  Daughter:-,   of   the    Revolution   have   placed   a  tablet  on   the 


100  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

105.  Siege  of  Lawrence. — In  August  the  siege  of 
Lawrence  became  serious.  Pro-slavery  men  occupied 
forts  at  Franklin,  Saunders,  and  Titus.  These  forts  con- 
trolled the  approaches  to  the  town  and  cut  off  supplies. 
Food  became  scarce.  Captain  Abbot  said,  "The  boys 
lived  for  days  on  oats.  It  was  like  eating  prairie  hay." 
On  August  13  Free  State  men  under  James  Lane  attacked 
Franklin,  smoked  out  the  block  house,  and  compelled  the 
garrison  to  surrender.  Two  days  afterwards  Fort  Saun- 
ders was  secured,  and  on  August  16,  Captain  Sam  Walker 
with  the  loss  of  only  one  man  captured  the  fortified  house 
of  Colonel  Titus  and  twenty  prisoners.  Colonel  Titus 
was  the  most  noted  of  border  ruffians.  On  Sunday, 
August  17,  Governor  Shannon  came  to  Lawrence,  and 
made  a  treaty  of  peace,  under  the  terms  of  which  pris- 
oners were  released. 

106.  Resignation  of  Governor  Shannon. — On  August 
18,  1856,  Governor  Shannon  wrote  to  President  Pierce, 
"I  am  unwilling  to  perform  the  duties  of  governor  of 
this  territory  any  longer."  On  August  21,  he  received 
notice  of  his  removal.  Secretary  Woodson  again,  con- 
trolled, and  the  reign  of  ruffianism  became  supreme. 

107.  Destruction  of  Osawatomie. — On  the  30th  of 
August,  250  men  from  Missouri,  under  General  John  W. 
Reid,  attacked  Osawatomie.  The  place  was  defended  by 
forty-one  men,  under  John  Brown.  In  this  action,  Fred- 
erick Brown,  a  son  of  John  Brown,  was  killed  by  Rev. 
Martin  White.  Six  Free  State  men  also  lost  their  lives. 
All  the  houses  in  Osawatomie  save  four  were  burned. 

sidewalk  on  Kansas  Avenue,  Topeka.  marking  the  lots  on  which  the 
Topcka  fonstitiitional  convention  assembled,  and  where  Col.  E.  V.  Sumner 
dispersed  the  Topeka  Legislature. 


THE    EEIGN    OF    VIOLENCE.  101 

108.  Mob  at  Leavenworth. — In  Leavenworth,  a  Pro- 
slavery  mob  murdered  William  Phillips,  a  Free  State 
lawyer,  who  had  been  tarred  and  feathered  the  year  be- 
fore, and  a  vigilance  committee  compelled  Free  State 
citizens  to  leave  the  city. 

109.  Exchange  of  Prisoners. — On  the  5th  of  Septem- 
ber, 1856,  a  force  of  300  Free  State  men  from  Lawrence 
under  James  Lane  with  two  pieces  of  artillery  appeared 
at  Lecompton  on  the  heights  about  the  town.  They  were 
met  by  Colonel  Phillip  St.  George  Cooke,  with  a  detach- 
ment of  United  States  troops,  who  demanded  the  errand 
of  the  approaching  army.  It  was  explained  that  the  re- 
lease of  the  Free  State  prisoners — not  the  "treason  pris- 
oners," who  were  held  by  United  States  authorities,  but 
all  others — was  demanded,  and  the  general  protection  of 
the  Free  State  population  from  robbery  and  murder.  As 
a  result  of  this  interview  an  exchange  of  prisoners  was 
effected. 

110.  Release  of  Dr.  Robinson. — By  the  efforts  of  Amos 
A.  Lawrence,  who  had  some  influence  with  President 
Pierce,  Dr.  Robinson  was  liberated  on 
bail  of  $5,000  just  four  months  from  the 
day  he  was  taken  prisoner.  Of  the  re- 
maining prisoners,  some  were  tried  and 
acquitted,  some  escaped,  and  in  the  case 
of  others  the  suit  was  dismissed. 

111.  Response  to  the  Narrative  of  the 
Struggle.— The  calamities  of  Free  State 
men  stirred  Northern  sentiment  deeply.  ^ 
Pulpit,  press,  and  convention  rang  with   Mrs.saraT.L.Eobinson 
the   story   of   suffering.      Legislatures    of   several   states 


102  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

passed  resolutions  of  sympathy  for  the  Kansas  pioneer 
struggling  for  the  cause  of  liberty.  Mrs.  Robinson's  book, 
"Kansas — Its  Interior  and  Exterior  Life,"  appeared  in 
the  autumn  of  1856.  Its  strong,  brave,  clear,  realistic 
narrative  of  border  events  stirred  to  the  depths  the  hearts 
of  its  readers.  It  ran  through  nine  editions.  Beneficent 
societies  sprang  up  everywhere. ^^  Three  hundred  thou- 
sand dollars  in  money  and  provisions  were  sent  to  Kansas, 
and  hundreds  of  settlers  poured  into  the  territory.  They 
were  shut  off  from  Missouri ;  therefore  avoiding  that  state, 
they  came  down  through  Iowa  and  Nebraska. ^^ 

13.  One  of  the  companies  of  emigrants  was  called  "Lane's  Army."  It 
was  a  body  of  400  settlers,  many  of  them  from  Chicago.  Members 
stopped  along  the  line  and  founded  Holton  and  Plymouth. 

Late  in  September,  James  Redpath  came  with  130  men.  Shannon 
ordered  Colonel  Johnson  to  examine  the  force  on  its  advent  to  ascertain 
the  purpose  of  its  coming.  Colonel  Johnson  pronounced  them  "'Real 
immigrants."  Another  division  consisted  of  218  men  and  five  women.  "I 
do  not  see  many  spinning-wheels  sticking  out  of  the  wagons,"  said 
Colonel  Cooke  as  he  passed  among  them.  "Indeed,  there  were  no  visible 
furniture,  agricultural  implements,  or  mechanical  tools,  but  all  the 
requisite  articles  for  camping  and  campaigning  purposes."  This  band  was 
marched  before  the  governor,  but  was  liberated  after  he  had  given  them 
some  advice  as  to  the  conduct  of  settlers  in  Kansas. 

14.  "The  Rifle  Christians"  from  Connecticut  under  the  leadership  of 
C.  B.  Lines  were  a  far-famed  band.  They  came  armed  with  Bibles  and 
rifles.  Said  their  leader,  "Like  our  fathers  we  go  with  the  Bible,  to 
indicate  the  peaceful  nature  of  our  mission  and  the  harmless  character 
of  our  company,  and  a  weapon  to  teach  those  who  may  be  disposed  to 
molest  us  (if  any  such  there  be)  that  while  we  determine  to  do  that 
which  is  right,  we  will  not  submit  tamely  to  that  which  is  wrong."  This 
company  founded  Wabaunsee.  It  was  also  known,  as  the  "Beecher  Bible 
Company." 

Eeview  Questions. — Give  the  dates  of  Governor  Shannon's  Ad- 
ministration.— Why  was  the  Topeka  movement  organized? — Trace 
carefully  the  Topeka  movement,  through  this  administration,  gi\dng 
each  event. — When  and  where  did  the  Free  State  Party  have  its 
beginning? — What  was  the  attitude  of  this  party  with  regard  to 
United  States  laws? — Give  the  date,  causes  and  results  of  the 
Wakarusa  War? — What  do  you  think  of  the  action  of  Sheri-ff  Jones, 
Governor  Shannon  and  Dr.  Eobinson  in  this  war?  —  Give  the 
attitude  and  action  of  the  Territorial  Judiciary. — Describe  the  Sack 
of  Lawrence,  giving  causes  and  results. — Trace  John  Brown  through 


THE    REIGN    OP    A^IOLENCE.  103 

this  administration. — Locate  the  places  about  Lawrence  that  figured 
in  the  Siege. — Do  you  think  there  is  a  turning  point  in  this  adminis- 
tration favorable  to  the  Free  State  Party? — If  you  do,  what  is  the 
turning  point? — Describe  the  disbanding  of  the  Topeka  Legislature. 
— What  was  the  response  to  the  narrative  of  the  Struggle? 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


GOVERNOR  GEARY'S  ADMINISTRATION. 


Sept.  9,  1856— April  16,  1857. 

112.  Third  Territorial  Governor.— On  the  9th  of  Sep- 
tember, 1856,  Governor  Geary,^  third  governor  of  Kansas 
Territory,  arrived  at  Fort  Leavenworth.  He  was  a  man 
of  exceptional  executive  ability,  strong  and  forceful  in 
character,  true  to  a  trust,  and  a  soldier  of  reputation  for 
bravery.  He,  like  Dr.  Robinson,  had  had  experience  in 
the  western  world,  having  been  first 
mayor  of  San  Francisco,,  and  having 
taken  prominent  part  in  establishing 
the  government  of  California. 

The  disorders  of  Shannon's  admin- 
istration had  aroused  indignation  the 
country  over,  and  the  Democratic 
Party  feared  defeat  at  the  coming 
election  if  something  were  not  done  to 

Governor  John  W.   Geary.     adjUSt  the  difficulties  iu  KaUSaS.     GoV- 

ernor  Geary  was  decided  upon  as  a  man  strong  enough  to 
master  the  situation.     He  was  confident  of  success ;  the 

1.  Governor  Geary  first  gave  peace,  in  degree  at  least,  to  the  Terri- 
tory. He  later  served  two  terms  as  governor  of  Pennsylvania,  and  was 
one  of  its  most  noted  chief  executives.  During  the  Civil  war  he  asked 
permission  to  raise  a  regiment.  Within  forty-eight  hours  6,000  men 
applied  to  him  for  enlistment  in  his  regiment. 

Alalia  Child  sent  a  hox  of  clothing  to  the  women  of  Kansas.  She 
wrote,  "Xever  have  I  heen  so  proud  of  women  as  I  have  been  while 
reading  of  your  patieht  endurance  and  your  undaunted  heroism." 

104 


THE  KEIGN  OF  VIOLENCE.  105 

desperate  conditions  fascinated  him,  and  his  hand  with  no 
uncertain  grasp  took  the  lever  of  Kansas  affairs. 

He  did  not  hesitate  to  report  the  true  conditions  in 
Kansas  to  the  authorities  at  Washington.  He  wrote  to 
President  Pierce  that  he  had  to  contend  against  "armed 
ruffians  and  brigands";  and  that  the  town  of  Leaven- 
worth was  in  the  hands  of  bodies  of  men,  who,  calling 
themselves  militia,  perpetrated  the  most  atrocious  out- 
rages under  the  shadow  of  authority  from  the  Territorial 
government. 

113.  The  Hickory  Point  Fight. — Governor  Geary  ar- 
rived at  Lecompton  on  the  10th  of  September,  1856.  The 
next  day,  Captain  Harvey,  a  Free  State  partisan,  surprised 
a  Pro-slavery  force  at  Slough 
Creek,  in  Jefferson  County, 
and  captured  the  blood-red 
South  Carolina  flag,  which 
had  been  raised  at  the  sack- 
ing of  Lawrence  in  May. 
Captain  Harvey,  two  days 
afterwards,  attacked  Hick- 
ory Point,  in  Jefferson 
County.  Later  the  101  men  south  caroiiua  Flag. 
under  Harvey  were  taken  prisoners  by  Colonel  Cooke, 
U.  S.  A.,  who  marched  them  to  Lecompton,  where  they 
were  held  by  Judge  Cato  for  trial  on  the  charge  of  murder 
in  the  first  degree.  Twenty  of  these  were  afterwards 
sentenced  to  five  years  in  the  penitentiary,  though  they 
were  never  incarcerated. 

114.  Governor  Geary's  Action. — Governor  Geary's 
first  act  was  to  issue  a  proclamation  disbanding  the  Terri- 


106  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

torial  militia,  and  ordering  all  other  armed  men  to  quit 
the  Territory.  The  Governor  proceeded  to  Lawrence, 
September  13,  and  found  the  town  in  arms  in  prospect 
of  another  invasion  with  about  300  poorly  equipped  and 
discouraged  defenders.  Even  the  women  and  children 
were  preparing  to  aid  in  the  hopeless  defense. 

He  left  United  States  troops  there,  and  went  to  the 
junction  of  the  Wakarusa  and  the  Kansas  Rivers,  where 
he  found  a  force  of  2,700  men  from  Missouri  armed  and 
organized,  drawn  up  horse  and  foot,  and  having  with 
them  a  six-pound  battery.  They  were  under  the  com- 
mand of  Atchison,  Reid,  Whitfield,  and  Sheriff  Jones^ 
and  were  on  their  way  to  the  destruction  of  Lawrence. 
Governor  Geary  ordered  the  force  to  disband  and  it  dis- 
appeared. This  is  sometimes  called  ''The  Invasion  of 
the  2,700." 

115.  Free  Immigration. — The  Missouri  River  had  been 
for  some  time  closed  against  Free  State  travel,  and  large 
parties  of  Free  State  immigrants  had  been  entering  the 
Territory  via  Iowa  and  Nebraska.  In  October,  a  party 
was  arrested  by  Colonel  Cooke  and  a  Deputy  United 
States  Marshal.  Governor  Geary  met  the  immigrants  and 
ordered  their  release.     Afterward,  immigration  was  free. 

116.  Thanksgiving  Day. — Governor  Geary  appointed 
Thursday,  November  20,  as  a  day  of  thanksgiving  for 
the  advent  of  peace. ^ 

117.  Kansas    State   University   Initiated. — ''As   early 

2.  Sheriff  .Tonos  resip:ned  because  Governor  Geary  refused  to  order 
from  Port  Leavenworth  one  hundred  balls  and  chains  to  put  on  the  Free 
State   prisoners  at  Lfcompton. 

3.  November  1,  the  Herald  of  Freedom  was  reissued  at  Lawrence, 
G.  W.  Brown,  the  editor,  raised  the  Stars  and  Stripes  over  the  building. 
The  office  was  crowded  with  people  waiting  for  "-he  paper.  They  had  had 
none  since  May  21. 


THE    EEIGN    OF    VIOLENCE.  107 

as  1856,  Mr.  Amos  A.  Lawrence,  of  Boston,  one  of  the 
founders  of  the  New  England  Emigrant  Aid  Company,  in 
whose  honor  the  city  of  Lawrence  received  its  name,  re- 
quested Chatles  Robinson  to  spend  some  money  for  him 
in  laying  the  foundation  of  a  school  building  on  the  north 
part  of  Mount  Oread.  Mr.  Lawrence  explained  his  hopes 
and  plans  in  a  letter  to  Rev.  Ephraim  Nute,  of  Lawrence, 
dated  December  16,  1856.  He  says:  'You  shall  have  a 
college  which  shall  be  a  school  of  learning  and  at  the 
same  time  a  monument  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  those 
martyrs  of  liberty  who  fell  during  the  recent  struggles. 
Beneath  it  their  dust  shall  rest ;  in  it  shall  burn  the  light 
of  liberty  which  shall  never  be  extinguished  until  it 
illumines  the  whole  continent.  It  shall  be  called  the 
''Free  State  College,"  and  all  the  friends  of  freedom  shall 
be  invited  to  lend  it  a  helping  hand.'  His  dream  was 
•  our  great  university." 

A  meeting  was  held  on  Christmas  Day,  1856,  to  elect 
a  board  of  trustees  for  the  University.  Governor  Geary 
and  Dr.  Robinson  were  made  members. 

118.  The  Topeka  Legislature. — The  Topeka  Legisla- 
ture re-assembled  in  January,  1857,  when  some  of  the 
officers  and  members  were  arrested  by  a  Deputy  United 
States  Marshal,  and  taken  to  Tecumseh. 

119.  Second    Territorial    Legislature, — Lecompton. — 

The   second    Territorial   Legislature   met   at   Lecompton, 
January  12.     Many  of  the  bills  passed  were  most  unjust. 

4.  Since  Geary's  administration  the  President  and  his  advisers  had 
felt  that  Kansas  could  not  be  made  a  slave  state,  but  that  it  might  yet 
be  saved  to  Democracy,  and  this  they  hoped  Governor  Walker  would 
secure. 


108  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

Governor  Geary  vetoed  them,  but  they  v^ere  passed  over 
his  veto.    The  legislature  was  entirely  Pro-slavery.* 

120.  Governor  Geary  Retires. — Governor  Geary's  con- 
tentions with  the  legislature  and  judiciary  to  secure  jus- 
tice for  the  people  were  continuous.  His  life  was  con- 
stantly threatened.  He  applied  to  the  federal  commander 
for  troops,  and  was  coolly  told  that  they  were  otherwise 
employed.  At  the  urgent  request  of  his  friends  he  left 
the  territory  and  went  to  Washington  to  secure  aid  from 
the  administration.  Being  unsuccessful,  he  resigned. 
Many  years  afterward,  in  grateful  remembrance  of  Gov- 
ernor Geary's  course  in  Kansas,  the  name  of  Davis  County 
was  changed  to  Geary. 

121.  Governor  Walker's  Appointment. — James  Bu- 
chanan became  president  of  the  United  States,  March  4, 
1857.  Robert  J.  Walker  was  appointed  governor,  March 
26,  1857.  He  was  preceded  to  the  Territory  by  Frederick 
P.  Stanton,  Secretary,  who  became  Acting  Governor  until 
the  arrival  of  Governor  Walker. 


Eeview  Questions. — Note  the  dates  of  Geary's  Administration. 
— Why  was  he  appointed  governor? — What  was  his  immediate  action 
on  arriving  in  the  Territory? — Describe  the  Invasion  of  the  2,700. — 
Relate  the  story  of  the  initiation  of  the  State  University. — Where  was 
the  meeting  of  the  Second  Territorial  Legislature  held? — How  did 
Governor  Geary  serve  the  Territory? — What  was  the  greatest  hin- 
drance to  his  endeavors  to  bring  about  a  reign  of  law  and  order? — 
What  is  your  opinion  of  President  Pierce's  attitude  so  far  in  the  his- 
tory of  the  Territory? 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

GOVERNOK  WALKER'S  ADMINISTRATION. 
April  16,  1857— May  12,   1858. 

122.     Fourth  Territorial  Governor. — Governor  Walker, 
the  most  able  man  sent  to  the  Territory  from  Washington, 
arrived  in  Kansas  in  May,  1857.    He  was  a  Pennsylvanian 
by  birth.     He  had  served  as  United 
States  Senator  from  Mississippi,  and       ^^^^^^ 
during     Polk's     administration     was     ^^         \^ 
Secretary   of   the    Treasury.      He    re- 
fused to  serve  as  governor  of  Kansas 
Territory  on  the  President's  request, 
hvX  being  urged  and  promised  the  un- 
divided support  of  the  administration 
as  well  as  a  free  hand  in  Kansas  af- 
fairs, he  consented.     His  idea  was  to 
establish  the  ballot  in  Kansas,  to  se-Govemor  rom.  j.  waiker. 
cure  obedience  to  territorial  laws,  and  to  promote  the 
adoption  of  a  constitution  by  which  Kansas  could  be  ad- 
mitted as  a  state. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Territory,  Frederick  P.  Stanton, 
was  a  very  capable,  scholarly  lawyer,  who  had  served  in 
Congress  ten  years  as  representative  from  Tennessee. 
He  preceded  Governor  Walker  to  Kansas  and  served  as 
acting  governor  until  May.  Governor  Walker  on  his  tour 
of  the  Territory  pledged  the  people  that  their  rights  at 
the  ballot  box  should  be  held  sacred  and  inviolable. 

109 


^te^^ 


110  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

123.  Election  of  Delegates  for  Lecompton  Constitu- 
tional Convention. — A  Pro-slavery  constitutional  conven- 
tion had  been  for  a  long  time  in 
contemplation.     The  Pro-slavery 
Territorial  Legislature  on  June 
15,  1857,  had  passed  a  bill  au- 
thorizing  the    election    of    dele- 
gates.      Governor     Geary     had 
vetoed  it  on  the  grounds  that  it 
did  not  provide  for  the  submis- 
sion  of   the    constitution   to   the 
people.     Another  objection  was 
that   the   census   for  the   appor-  ^'''''^'^   '^^"*^^- 
tionment  of  delegates  had  been  very  imperfect. 

Secretary  Stanton,  however,  on  his  arrival  stood  for 
the  action  of  the  Territorial  Legislature,  and  submitted 
the  election  of  delegates  for  the  Lecompton  Constitutional 
Convention.  The  Free  State  men  for  the  above  reasons 
refused  to  take  part  in  the  election.  Only  2,071  votes 
were  cast  out  of  9,251  registered. 

124.  Election  of  Territorial  Legislature. — October  5, 
1857,  was  a  ''red-letter"  day  for  the  Free  State  advo- 
cates. It  was  the  regular  election  for  members  of  the 
Territorial  Legislature  and  territorial  delegate  to  Con- 
gress. In  order  that  the  returns  might  express  the  will 
of  the  Kansas  people,  United  States  troops  were  stationed 
at  many  of  the  voting  places.  This  action  discouraged 
invasions  from  Missouri.  However,  at  Oxford  precinct 
in  Johnson  County  and  in  McGhee  County,^  an  Indian 

1.     McGhee    County    is    now    Cherokee    County, 


THE    REIGN    OF    VIOLENCE.  m 

reservation,  a  large  fraudulent  vote  was  cast.^  Oxford 
precinct  containing  eleven  houses  cast  1,628  Pro-slavery 
votes.  Governor  Walker  and  Secretary  Stanton,  true  to 
their  promises,  issued  a  proclamation  rejecting  the  re- 
turns from  these  two  precincts.  This  settled  the  Free 
State  character  of  the  lawful  returns,  securing  to  that 
party  nine  of  the  thirteen  councilmen  and  thirty-four 
of  the  thirty-nine  representatives  composing  the  legisla- 
ture. 

Marcus  J.  Parrott  was  elected  Free  State  Territorial 
Delegate  to  Congress. 

125.    Lecompton  Constitutional  Convention. — The  Le- 

compton  Constitutional  Convention  which  was  Pro- 
slavery  met  September  11,  and  framed  the  second  Consti- 
tution of  Kansas. 

•  The  Pro-slavery  Party,  since  a  majority  of  the  people 
were  for  a  free  state,  concluded  that  their  only  course 
was  the  submission  of  the  constitution  to  Congress  with-- 
out  its  being  submitted  to  the  people.  It  was  provided, 
therefore,  that  the  vote  should  be  taken  on  the  "Consti- 
tution without  slavery,"  or  the  "Constitution  with 
slavery,"  no  vote  being  allowed  against  the  Constitution. 
The  Free  State  people  stood  for  the  submission  of  the 
whole  constitution,  not  merely  one  clause,  'and  refused  to 
vote.  The  vote,  taken  on  the  21st  of  December,  1857,  ac- 
corded to  John  Calhoun,  President  of  the  Lecompton 
Constitutional  Convention,  stood,  ''for  the  Constitution 

2.  .Judge  Cato  issued-  a  writ  of  mandamus  ordering  the  governor  to 
issue  certificytes  of  election  to  the  proslavery  delegates  from  the  Oxford 
and  IMcGhee  precints  ;  that  failing,  Sheriff  .Jones  tried  intimidation  and 
violence,   but  all   to  no  purpose.      Stanton   stood  tirm. 


112  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

with  slavery,"  6,226;  ''for  the  Constitution  without 
slavery,"  569.    An  enormous  fraudulent  vote  was  cast.^ 

126.  Second  Submission  of  Lecompton  Constitution. 

— During  the  sitting  of  the  convention,  Secretary  Stanton 
at  the  urgent  request  of  many  citizens  called  a  special 
session  of  the  Legislature.  A  message  to  the  Legislature 
from  Stanton,  Governor  Walker  being  absent,  urged  the 
submission  of  the  whole  constitution.  The  legislature 
ordered  a  vote  of  the  people  on  January  4,  1858,  "for" 
or  "against"  the  Constitution.  The  vote  as  declared  by 
the  Governor  was  10,288  against  the  Constitution  to  138 
for  it.    Still  the  Lecompton  Constitution  was  not  shelved. 

127.  Resignation  of  Secretary  Stanton. — After  having 
called  the  special  session  of  the  legislature,  Secretary  and 
Acting  Governor  Stanton  was  relieved  of  his  duties  by 
the  administration  at  Washington,  and  James  W.  Denver 
was  appointed  in  his  stead,  December  21,  1857. 

128.  Third  Territorial  Legislature. — Lecompton. — The 

third  Territorial  (and  first  Free  State)  Legislature  met  in 
regular  session  at  Lecompton  the  4th  of  January,  1858, 
organized,  and  on  the  6th  adjourned  to  Lawrence.  The 
first  act  of  the  legislature  was  the  preparation  of  a  me- 
morial to  Congress,  disavowing  all  intention  to  serve 
under  the  Lecompton  Constitution,  and  urging  that  body 
not  to  admit  Kansas  into  the  Union  under  it. 
^  The  Territorial  Legislature  remained  in  session  at 
Lawrence  for  forty  days.     It  passed  bills  to  repeal  the 

3.  An  interesting  bit  of  history  is  told  in  connection  with  the  elec- 
tion returns  from  Oxford.  The  legislative  investigating  committee  was 
interested  in  securing  them.  They  were  supposed  to  be  in  the  hands  of 
McLe.in,  chief  clerk  of  Calhotin,  president  of  the  convention.  Irivesti- 
gation    failed    to    find    them,    however.      General    Walker,    then    sheriff   of 


THE    REIGN    OF    VIOLENCE.  113 

slave  code,  and  to  abolish  slavery  in  the  Territory,  over 
the  veto  of  Acting  Governor  Denver,  and  to  remove  the 
Capital  of  the  Territory  to  Minneola,  Franklin  County. 
It  also  provided  for  the  election  of  delegates  to  meet  in 
a  Constitutional  Convention.  This  action  resulted  in  the 
Leavenworth  Constitution. 

129.  The  Topeka  Legislature. — The  Topeka  Legisla- 
ture met  in  Topeka  in  January,  1858,  adjourned  to  Law- 
rence, and  asked  the  Territorial  legislature  then  in  ses- 
sion to  substitute  the  Topeka  organization  for  the  Terri- 
torial organization.  This  they  refused  to  do.  The  Topeka 
government  had  accomplished  the  work  for  which  it  had 
been  designed.  In  its  constitution,  it  had  given  expres- 
sion of  the  belief  of  a  large  and  powerful  faction  of 
Kansas  people.  It  had  united  them  in  common  faith  and 
had  been  a  revelation  of  their  strength,  determination, 
and  ability.  Now  the  supporters  of  the  Topeka  move- 
ment felt  that  they  should  unite  with  the  newer  Free 
State  movement  for  another  constitution.  A  few  of  the 
old  members  met  on  March  4,  but  there  being  no  quorum 
adjourned  to  meet  no  more  as  the  Topeka  Legislature. 

130.  The  Leavenworth  Constitution. — The  Convention 
assembled  at  Mineola  on  March  23,  1858,  and  adjourned  to 
Leavenworth,  re-assembling  on  the  25th.  The  Leaven- 
worth Constitutional  Convention  adopted  a  Constitution 
which  did  not  contain  the  word  ''white."  At  the  elec- 
tion of  May  18,  the  Leavenworth  Constitution  received 

Douglas  County,  was  informed  that  the  returns  were  hidden  under  a 
wood-pile  near  McLean's  office.  Wallier  secured  a  Search  and  Seizure 
warrant,  went  down  and  found  them  under  the  wood-pile  in  a  candle  box. 


114 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


an  aggregate  of  3,000  votes.    It  was  presented,  but  never 
voted  on  by  either  House  of  Congress. 

Minneola,  where  the  Convention  first  assembled,  was 
not  legally  made  the  capital  of  Kansas  Territory.  The 
bill  removing  the  capital  thither  was  declared  illegal 
by  Jeremiah  S.  Black,  Attorney  General  of  the  United 
States. 

131.  Governor  Walker's  Resignation. — The  adminis- 
tration at  Washington  failed  to  keep  faith  with  Governor 
Walker,  and  knowing  he  would  be  unable  to  redeem  his 
promises  to  the  people,  he  resigned  in  May.  Acting  Gov- 
ernor Denver  was  made  Governor  and  Hugh  S.  Walsh, 
secretary,  May  12,  1858. 

THE  FOUNDING  OF  SCHOOLS. 

132.  Baker  University. — Baker  University  was  char- 


The     "Old     Castle,"     Baker     University. 


tered  under  the  auspices  of  the  Methodist  Church,  and 
located  at  Baldwin,  in  February,  1858.  It  was  named 
after  Bishop  Osman  Baker.  President  Lincoln  contributed 
$100  for  its  benefit. 


TH^:    REIGN    OF    VIOLENCE.  II5 

133.     Highland    University. — Highland    University,    a 
Presbyterian   School,    began   its   career   at   Highland   in 

1858. 


Eeview  Questions.— Who  was  the  Fourth  Territorial  Governor, 
and  when  did  he  serve? — What  three  measures  did  Governor  Walker 
advocate  on  his  coming  into  the  Territory? — Who  was  his  secretary, 
and  what  did  he  do  as  soon  as  he  arrived  to  carry  out  the  desire  of 
his  chief? — Give  the  story  of  the  election  of  the  Territorial  Legis- 
lature on  October  5,  1857. — What  was  the  character  of  the  Third 
Territorial  Legislature? — Name  the  most  important  laws  passed. — 
What  were  the  results  of  the  Topeka  government? — What  was  the  dis- 
tinguishing characteristic  of  the  Leavenworth  Constitution? — Why 
was  Minneola  not  made  a  capital  of  Kansas? — Why  did  Governor 
Walker  resign? — When  was  Baker  University  founded? 


CHAPTER  XV. 

GOVERNOE  DENVER'S  ADMINISTRATION.  ' 
May  12,  1858— Dec.  18,  1858. 

134.  Fifth  Territorial  Governor. — Governor  Denver^ 
was  a  Virginian.  He  had  served  under  General  Scott  in 
Mexico,  ^and  as  State  Senator  in  California.  He  had 
been  a  member  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  and  at 
the  time  of  his  appointment  was  commissioner  of  Indian 
affairs.  From  being  Acting  Governor  during  Walker's 
administration  he  became  governor. 
Hugh  S.  Walsh  was  secretary  and 
acting  governor  during  Governor 
Denver's  absence. 

135.  The  Jayhawker. — The  greater 
part  of  border  ruffianism  heretofore 
occurred  within  a  radius  of  a  few 
miles  of  Lawrence.  Down  near  Ft. 
Scott  in  the  southeastern  part  of  the 
state,     hoAvever,     border    ruffianism 

Governor  James  W.  Denver,  j-^q^    aSSUHlcd    alarming    propOrtioUS. 

The  section  around  Ft.  Scott  was  settled  largely  by  Pro- 
slavery  people.  Finally,  a  few  Northerners  drifted  down 
into  that  section.  Missouri  ruffians  under  G.  W.  Clark 
made  several  raids  on  the  Free  State  members  of  the 
communities  there,  burning  houses,  stealing  property  and 

1.     The   city   of   Denver  was   named    in   honor   of   Governor   Denver,    by 
the   Lccompton    party    which    located   the    town   site.      ' 

116 


THE    EEIGN    OF    VIOLENCE.  II7 

assassinating  those  whom  they  considered  enemies  of  their 
cause.  The  Free  State  men  banded  together  for  protec- 
tion at  first,  but  finally  retaliated.  They  were  called 
"jayhawkers."-  Their  most  noted  leader  was  James 
Montgomery.-^ 

136.  The  Marais  des  Cygnes  Massacl-e. — The  darkest 
tragedy  in  the  annals  of  Border  Warfare  occurred  north 
of  Ft.  Scott  at  a  Trading  Post  on  the  Marais  des  Cygnes 
River,  in  Linn  County,  May  19,  1858.  A  party  of 
twenty-five  ruffians  from  across  the  border,  headed  by 
Captain  Charles  Hamilton,  collected  eleven  Free  State 
settlers,  stood  them  up  in  a  line  in  a  ravine  and  fired 
upon  them.  Five  fell  dead  and  all  the  others  save  one 
were  badly  wounded;  the  five  wounded  and  one  un- 
wounded  man  feigned  death  and  escaped.  The  murdered 
men  were  William  Stilwell,  Patrick  Ross,  William  Colpet- 
zer,  Michael  Robinson  and  John  F.  Campbell.  The 
wounded  were  William  Hairgrove,  Asa  Hairgrove,  B".  L. 
Reed,  Amos  Hall  and  Asa  Snyder;  the  unharmed  man 
was  Austin  Hall.     The  place  of  the  terrible  deed  is  now 

'  2.  The  origin  of  the  word  "jayhawker"  is  traced  to  an  Irishman 
named  Pat  Devlin.  One  morning  a  neighbor  is  said  to  have  met  him 
returning  from  a  foraging  expedition,  laden  vi'ith  spoils.  "Where  have 
you  been,  Pat?"  "Jayhawking,"  said  Pat.  "Jayhavi'king,"  said  the 
neighbor,  "What's  that"^?"  "Well,"  replied  Pat  philosophically,  "in  the 
old  country  we  have  a  bird  called  the  jayhawk,  which  kind  0'  worries  its 
prey.  It  seemed  to  me  as  I  was  riding  home  that  that  was  what  I'd 
been  doing."  It  is  said  that  the  depredations  of  some  of  the  jawhawkers 
were  no  less   terrible   than   those  of  the   Missourians. 

3.  Captain  James  Montgomery  was  a  brave  true-hearted  conscientious 
man  who  always  acted  from  principle.  Contrasted  with  him  was  Dr. 
Chas.  R,  .Jennison,  who  boasted  that  the  Missouri  mothers  hushed  their 
children  to  sleep   by   whispering  the   name  of   "Doc   Jennison." 

After  a  very  notorious  raid  from  Missouri  led  by  Clark,  Captain 
Montgomery,  bent  on  retaliation,  took  a  characteristic  way  to  find  out 
who  the  raiders  were.  He  went  over  into  Missouri  into  the  midst  of 
the  enemy  disguised  as  a  school  teacher.  He  secured  a  school,  taught  it 
two  weeks,  and  having  ascertained  the  personnel  of  the  raiding  party 
suddenly  disappeared.  The  school  master  reappeared  later  to  the  dis- 
comfiture   of   his   patrons    in    a    very    different   guise. 


118 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


marked  by  a  public  monument,*  and  its  memory  will  be 
forever  preserved  by  the  lines  of  Whittier,  with  their 
final  prophecy: 


LE  MARAIS  DU  CYGNE. 


'A  blush  as  of  roses 

Where  rose  never  grew ! 
Great  drops  on  the  bunch  grass, 

But  not  of  the  dew! 
A  taint  in  the  sweet  air 

Eor  wild  bees  to  shun ! 
A  stain  that  shall  never 

Bleach  out  in  the  sun! 


'  Prom  the  hearths  of  their  cabins, 

The  fields  of  their  corn, 
Unwarned  and  unweaponed. 

The  victims  were  torn — 
By  the  whirlwind  of  murder 

Swooped  up  and  swept  on 
To  the  low,  reedy  fenlands. 

The  Marsh  of  the  Swan. 


'  Back,  steed  of  the  prairies ! 

Sweet  song-bird,  fly  back! 
Wheel  hither,  bald  vulture ! 

Gray  wolf,  call  thy  pack! 
The  foul  human  vultures 

Have  feasted  and  fled; 
The  wolves  of  the  border 

Have  crept  from  the  dead. 

'  In  the  homes  of  their  rearing. 

Yet  warm  with  their  lives. 
Ye  wait  the  dead  only, 

Poor  children  and  wives! 
Put  out  the  red  forge  fire. 

The  smith  shall  not  come; 
Unyoke  the  brown  oxen, 

The  plowman  lies  dumb. 

'Wind    slow    from    the    Swan's 
Marsh, 
O  dreary  death-train, 
With  pressed  lips  as  bloodless 

As  lips  of  the  slain! 
Kiss  down  the  young  eyelids, 

Smooth  down  the  gray  hairs; 
Let  tears  quench  the  curses 
That  burn  thro '  your  prayers. 


'  With  s.  vain  plea  for  mercy 

No  stout  knee  was  crooked; 
In  the  mouths  of  the  rifles 

Eight  m.anly  they  looked. 
How  paled  the  May  sunshine, 

Green  Marais  du  Cygne, 
When  the  death-smoke  Dlew  over 

Thy  lonely  ravine. 

'  Strong  man  of  the  prairies, 

Mourn  bitter  and  wild! 
Wail,  desolate  woman! 

Weep,  fatherless  child! 
But  the  grain  of  God  springs  up 

From  ashes  beneath. 
And  the  crown  of  His  harvest 

Is  life  out  of  death. 

'  Not  in  vain  on  the  dial 

The  shade  moves  along 
To  point  the  great  contrasts 

Of  right  and  of  wrong; 
Free  homes  and  free  altars 

And  fields  of  ripe  food; 
The  reeds  of  the  Swan's  Marsh, 

Whose  bloom  is  of  blood. 


4.     Only  one  of  the  murderers  was  ever  brought  to  justice  and  he  not 
until  five  years  after  the  tragedy. 


THE    EEIGN    OF    VIOLENCE.  119 

* '  On  the  lintels  of  Kansas  Henceforth  to  the  sunset, 

That  blood  shall  not  dry,  Unchecked  on  her  way. 

Henceforth  the  Bad  Angel  Shall  liberty  follow 

Shall  harmless  go  by !  The  march  of  the  day. ' ' 

137.  Peace  Tour  of  Governor  Denver. — Governor  Den- 
ver made  a  peace  tour  of  the  country  after  the  tragedy. 
The  climax  of  his  endeavors  was  at  a  mass  meeting  at 
Fort  Scott.  He  said,  "I  shall  treat  actual  settlers  with- 
out regard  to  former  difficulties.  I  do  not  propose  to  dig 
up  the  past.  Both  parties,  have  done  wrong,  but  I  shall 
let  all  that  go." 

138.  Visit  of  John  Brown. — John  Brown  made  a  visit 
to  the  Southeast  shortly  after  Governor  Denver's  peace 
mission.  Brown's  advent  was  anything  but  quieting. 
He  entered  Missouri,  brought  over  fourteen  persons  law- 
fully bound  in  servitude,  and  though  a  reward  of  $3,000 
was  offered  by  the  Governor  of  Missouri  for  his  capture, 
he  escaped  with  his  flock  to  Canada. 

139.  Failure  of  Lecompton  Constitution. — It  was  evi- 
dent by  the  beginning  of  1858,  that  slavery  could  never 
be  established  in  Kansas  with  the  consent  of  the  people, 
yet,  nevertheless,  President  Buchanan  urged  upon  Con- 
gress the  acceptance  of  the  Lecompton  Constitution,  de- 
claring that  Kansas  was  "already  a  slave  State,  as  much 
as  Georgia  or  South  Carolina."  In  this  policy  he  was 
vigorously  opposed  by  Senator  Douglas.  After  much 
discussion  the  Lecompton  Constitution  was  sent  back  to 
the  Kansas  people.  The  vote  was  taken  August  2,  1858, 
under  the  propositions  of  the  "English  bill,"'"  and  again 
the  Constitution  was  repudiated  by  11,812  to  1,926  votes. 

5.  The  English  Bill  was  the  bill  under  which  the  Constitution  was 
considered. 


120  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

140.  Resignation  of  Governor  Denver. — Governor 
Denver  resigned  October  10,  1858.  He  was  the  first  gov- 
ernor not  removed  or  compelled  to  resign.  Hugh  S.  Walsh 
served  as  acting  governor  until  the  arrival  of  Governor 
Medary. 

Eeview  Questions. — Who  was  the  Fifth  Territorial  Governor? — 
"What  is  the  origin  of  the  term  ' '  jayhawker  "? — Describe  the  Marais 
des  Cygnes  Massacre.— What  do  you  think  of  the  peace  tour  of  Gov- 
ernor Denver? — Tell  of  John  Brov\/n  as  a  liberator. — Why  was  the 
Lecompton  Constitution  repudiated? 


MAKING  THE  CONSTITUTION 

CHAPTER  XVI. 


GOVERNOR  MEDARY'S  ADMINISTRATION. 
Dec.  18,  1858— Feb.  9,  1861. 

141.  Sixth  Territorial  Governor. — Samuel  Medary^ 
was  an  editor  of  prominence  in  Columbus,  Ohio.  He  was  a 
forceful  writer,  and  made  the  "Ohio  Statesman"  a  power 
in  the  land.  He  served  his  party  so 
faithfully  and  well  that  his  admirers 
gave  him  the  title  of  "Old  Wheel 
Horse  of  Democracy."  He  nominated 
James  K.  Polk  for  the  presidency, 
and  was  offered  the  position  of  United 
States  minister  to  Chili;  Medary  was 
Minnesota's  last  territorial  governor, 
and  the  last  one  to  hold  that  office  in 

Kansas.       He    began    his    duties,  at    Le-  Governor   Samuel   Medary. 

compton  December  18,  1858.  George  M.  Beebee  was 
secretary  and  acting  governor  during  the  absence  of  his 
chief. 

142.  Fourth      Territorial      Legislature — Lawrence. — 

Governor  Medary 's  position  required  him  to  pass  in  re- 

1.     Governor  Medary's  name  was  formerly  written  Madeira  and  is  still 
pronounced  so,  el  having  the  sound  a. 

121 


122  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

view  the  acts  of  the  Fourth  Territorial  Legislature.  That 
body  met  at  Lecompton  January  3,  1859,  and  adjourned 
at  once  to  Lawrence.  It  repealed  the  ''Bogus  Statutes" 
of  1855,  which  were  afterwards  burned  in  the  streets; 
made  provision  for  a  Constitutional  Convention  and  a 
State  Government  if  the  people  should  decide  for  it  at 
a  preliminary  election,  and  passed  an  act  of  amnesty  for 
offenders  in  certain  counties  who  had  been  fighting  over 
political  differences. 

WYANDOTTE  CONSTITUTION. 

143.  The  Convention. — The  election  of  delegates  to 
the  Convention  occurred  on  the  7th  of  June,  1859. 

The  Convention  which  was  to  frame  the  Constitution 
under  which  Kansas  was  destined  to  enter  the  Union 
of  the  States,  assembled  at  Wyandotte,  July  5,  1859.  It 
was  composed  of  fifty-two  delegates. 

In  the  election  of  these,  the  old  appellations  of  "Free 
State"  and  "Pro-slavery"  were  abandoned,  and  the 
elected  delegates  were  classified  as  thirty-five  Republi- 
cans and  seventeen  Democrats.  It  was  the  first  Consti- 
tutional Convention  in  Kansas  which  contained  members 
of  both  political  parties.  A  permanent  organization  was 
effected  by  the  choice  of  James  M.  Winchell,  as  Presi- 
dent ;  John  A.  Martin,  as  Secretary. 

144.  The  Model.— The  Constitution  of  the  State  of 
Ohio  Avas  adopted  as  a  "model  or  basis  of  action." 

145.  For  Freedom. — The  Convention  was  for  freedom. 
The  Sixth  Section  of  the  Bill  of  Rights  was  made  to  read 


MAKING    THE    CONSTITUTION. 


123 


Samuel    A.    Kinsman, 
Temporary    Chairman. 


''There  shall  be  no  slavery  in  this 
State,  and  no  involuntary  servitude, 
except  for  crime,  whereof  the  party 
shall  have  been  duly  convicted." 

A  proviso  to  suspend  this  section,  for 
one  year .  after  the  admission  of  the 
State,  was  voted  down,  twenty-eight 
to  eleven.  This  was  the  last  sugges- 
tion made  to  allow  slavery  to  exist  in 
Kansas,  for  a  day  or  an  hour.  Said  a 
member  of  the  Convention,  "the  Constitution  will  com- 
mend itself  to  the  good  and  true  everywhere,  because 
through  every  line  and  syllable  there  glows  the  generous 
sunshine  of  liberty." 

146.  Boundary  and  Capital. — The  Convention  rejected 
a  proposition  to  embrace,  in  the  new  State,  a  portion  of 
Nebraska  south  of  the  Platte.  It  fixed  the  western  boun- 
dary at  the  twenty-fifth  meridian,  cutting  off  the  Terri- 
torial county  of  Arapahoe,  which  was  afterwards  em- 
braced in  the  Territory  and  State  of  Colorado.  Thus,  the 
boundaries  of  Kansas  were  finally  and  permanently  de- 
termined. 

The  temporary  seat  of  Government  was  located  at  To- 
peka. 

147.  Adoption  of  the  Constitution. — The  vote  on  the 
constitution  was  taken  on  the  4th  of  October,  1859, 
and  stood :  for  the  Constitution,  10,421 ;  against  the  Con- 
stitution, 5,530.  The  "homestead  clause"  was  submitted 
separately,  and  received  8,788  votes,  as  against  4,772. 
Thus  the  free  people  of  Kansas  adopted  the  Wyandotte 
Constitution. 


124 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


148.  Men  of  the  Convention.— The  Wyandotte  Consti- 
tutional Convention  has  maintained  a  high  place  in  the 
regard  of  the  people  of  Kansas,  on  account  of  the  strong 

and  steadfast  character  of  its  mem- 
bership, and  of  the  solid  quality  of  its 
work.  Historians  of  the  Convention 
have  recorded  that  few  of  the  hereto- 
fore prominent  leaders  of  political 
action  in  the  Territory  were  present  in 
the  Convention,  and  that  a  large  pro- 
portion of  the  members  were  young 
men. 

Its  labors  were  followed,  within  two 
years,  by  the  admission  of  Kansas  as  a  State,  and  by  the 
outbreak  of  a  war  in  which  the  existence  of  the  State, 
and  of  the  Union  had  to  be  maintained.  In  the  councils 
of  the  civil  state,  and  in  its  armed  defense,  the  members 
of  the  Wyandotte  Convention  bore  a  high  and  honorable 
part.2 

149.  The    Permanent    Work    of    the    Convention. — 

Though    the    Wyandotte    Convention    contained   few    of 


Solon    0.    Thacher. 


2.  In  the  organization  of  the  first  Supreme  Court,  Samuel  A,  King- 
man served  as  an  Associate  Justice,  and  afterward,  as  its  Chief  Justice. 

Two  of  the  framers  of  the  Wyandotte  Constitution,  John  J.  Ingalls 
and  Edmund  G.  Ross,  lived  to  serve  Kansas  in  the  Senate  of  the  United 
States.  John  A.  Martin,  the  youthful  Secretary,  was  twice  chosen  Gov- 
ernor of  the  State.  Two  of  the  lawyers  of  the  body,  Solon  O.  Thacher 
and  William  C.  McDowell,  were  chosen  District  Judges  at  the  first  elec- 
tion under  the  Constitution.  These  and  many  others  served  the  State 
long  and  well  in  various  places  of  responsibility,  in  the  first  and  subse- 
quent Legislatures,  on  the  bench,  and  in  other  capacities.  W.  R.  Griffith, 
the  first  State  Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction,  was  a  member  of 
the   Convention. 

When  "war's  wild  deadly  hlast  was  blown,"  the  members  of  this  Con- 
vention rallied  to  the  standard.  James  G.  Blunt  entered  the  service  at 
once  and  became  a  major-general.  John  P.  Slough  became  a  brigadier- 
general,  while  other  officers  and  members  of  the  Wyandotte  Convention 
entered  the  army  as  line  and  field  officers  of  the  Kansas  regiments. 


MAKING    THE    CONSTITUTION. 


125 


Mrs.  0.  I.  H.  Nichols, 


those  who  had  prior  to  its  assemblage  been  recognized 
as  conspicuous-  leaders  in  controlling 
public  opinion  in  the  Territory,  it 
framed  a  Constitution  that  met  the 
Kansas  idea  of  the  rights  of  man,  of 
the  protection  .of  the  home,  and  the  es- 
tablishment of  justice.  The  spirit  of 
the  Constitution  has  been  preserved. 
None  of  the  amendments  added  to  it 
have  weakened  or  restricted  its  original 
purpose.  It  remains,  after  fifty  years, 
the  charter  of  liberty,  and  the  basis  of  law  in  Kansas.^ 

150.  Abraham  Lincoln  in  Kansas. — In  December,  1859, 
Abraham  Lincoln  visited  Kansas.  He  spoke  at  Elwood, 
Troy,  Doniphan,  Atchison  and  Leavenworth.  Lincoln 
had  made  his  entrance  into  the  national  political  arena 
by  virtue  of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Act,  and  consequently 
had  been  interested  in  the  welfare  of  Kansas  Territory 
since  its  organization.  That  the  people  of  Kansas  loved 
and  respected  Lincoln  goes  without  saying.  The  largest 
political  gathering  that  had  ever  assembled  in  Kansas 
heard  him  at  Leavenworth.  His  speech  was  substantially 
the  same  as  that  delivered  afterward  at  Cooper  Institute, 
New  York  City,  and  is  one  of  the  ablest  productions  of 
American  statesmen. 

151.  Election  of  Officers.— On  the  6th  of  December, 
1859,  an  election  had  been  held  under  the  Wyandotte 

3.  A  Kansas  woman,  Mrs.  Nichols,  attended  the  sessions  of  the 
convention  daily  and  sat  knitting  and  listening  while  the  members 
wrought  out  the  Constitution.  As  occasion  offered  she  counseled  for 
those  provisions  that  protect  the  sacred  rights  of  man,  the  protection 
of  the  home,  and  the  establishment  of  justice. 


126  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

Constitution  for  State  officers,  a  Eepresentative  in  Con- 
gress, and  members  of  the  Legislature. 

Dr.  Eobinson,  who  had  endeared  himself  to  the  hearts 
of  the  people  during  the  long  but  successful  struggle, 
was  chosen  the  first  governor  of  the  state  for  which  he 
had  labored  so  faithfully.  Martin  F.  Conway  was  elected 
representative  in  Congress.  In  the  national  election  of 
1860  Abraham  Lincoln  was  elected  president  of  the  United 
States. 

152.  The  Free  State  Party. — The  great  victory  after 
all  was  not  bought  by  battle  and  carnage,  but  by  the 
diplomacy  of  the  Free  State  Party,  of  whom  Dr.  Robinson 
was  chief.  Its  record  "has  no  parallel  in  American  his- 
tory." It  united  individuals  and  factions  into  an  efficient 
whole;  it  turned  the  mistakes  of  enemies  into  forces  in 
its  own  favor.  The  invasions,  the  arrest  of  the  Free  State 
officers,  the  dispersion  of  the  Topeka  legislature,  the  sack 
of  Lawrence,  all  were  blunders  of  the  Missouri  party 
which  the  Free  State  leaders  turned  to  their  own  account. 
On  every  corner  the  Missouri  party  was  out-generaled 
while  the  Free  State  forces  were  advanced  steadily  to 
victory.  The  early  acts  of  the  drama  of  the  Nation's 
trial  were  played  in  Kansas  and  were  the  foreshadowing 
and  the  prophecy  of  the  Civil  War. 

153.  Fifth  Territorial  Legislature — Lawrence. — The 
fifth  and  last  Territorial  Legislature  of  Kansas  met  at 
Lecompton  on  the  2d  of  January,  1860,  and  in  spite  of 
the  protests  of  Governor  Medary,  adjourned  to  Lawrence. 
The  Governor  and  Secretary  remained  at  Lecompton, 
the  Legislature  adjourned  sine  die.    The  Governor  called 


MAKING    THE    CONSTITUTION.  127 

the  Legislature  to  meet  in  special  session  at  Lecompton. 
The  Legislature  met  and  passed  a  bill  adjourning  to 
Lawrence ;  the  Governor  vetoed  the  bill ;  it  was  passed 
over  his  veto,  and  the  Legislature  assembled  in  Lawrence. 
The  most  important  act  of  the  legislature  was  the  passage 
of  a  bill  abolishing  slavery.  Governor  Medary  vetoed 
the  bill.  It  was  passed  over  his  veto.  This  was  the  last. 
Governor  Medary  resigned  in  December,  1860,  and  was 
tendered  a  public  dinner  at  Lawrence,  in  token  of  the 
appreciation  felt  for  the  dignity,  firmness  and  impartiality 
with  which  he  had  performed  his  duties.  George  M. 
Beebe,  Secretary  of  the  Territory,  became  acting  Gover- 
nor and  continued  in  this  capacity  until  the  inauguration 
of  the  State  Government,  February  9,  1861. 

154.    Action   of   Congress   on   the   Constitution. — The 

people  of  Kansas  had  spoken,  but  the  ^Yill  of  the  people 
was  not  yet  to  be  consummated.  The  admission  of  Kansas 
as  a  Free  State  was  yet  to  be  opposed  in  the  Senate  of 
the  United  States.  On  the  11th  of  April,  1860,  the  House 
passed  the  bill  admitting  Kansas  under  the  AVyandotte 
Constitution.  The  bill  went  to  the  Senate  and  was  there 
rejected.  On  the  21st  of  January,  1861,  Jefferson  Davis 
and  other  Southern  Senators  announced'  their  withdrawal 
from  the  Senate  of  the  United  States.  On  the  same  day 
William  H.  Seward  called  up  in  the  Senate  the  bill  for 
the  admission  of  Kansas  and  it  was  passed,  thirty-six  to 
sixteen.  It  was  then  returned  to  the  House  and  passed 
out  of  the  regular  order,  117  to  forty-two,  and  on  the 
29th  of  January,  the  Act  was  signed  by  James  Buchanan, 


MAKING    THE    CONSTITUTION.  129 

President  of  the  United  States.     That  January  day  was 
thereafter  "Kansas  Day."* 

155.  Lincoln  Heralds  the  New  Star. — The  morning  of 
the  30th  of  January,  1861,  found  Kansas  a  Free  State  of 
the  Union.  The  first  time  the  flag  of  the  United  States 
was  raised  over  Independence  Hall,  Philadelphia,  with 
the  added  star  of  Kansas  in  the  field,  was  on  the  22d  of 
February,  1861.  In  raising  the  flag.  President-elect  Lin- 
coln said:  "I  am  invited  and  called  before  you  to  par- 
ticipate in  raising  above  Independence  Hall  the  flag  of 
our  country  with  an  additional  star  upon  it.  I  wish  to 
call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that,  under  the  blessing  of 
God,  each  additional  star  added  to  that  flag  has  given 
additional  prosperity  and  happiness  to  this  country." 
The  star  of  Kansas  was  raised  above  the  birthplace  of 
Independence,  on  the  birthday  of  Washington,  by  the 
hands  of  Lincoln,  the  Emancipator. 

When  a  deed  is  done  for  Freedom, 

Through  the  broad  earth  's  aching  breast 

Euns  a  thrill  of  joy  prophetic, 

Trembling  on  from  east  to  west. 

—Lowell. 

INDUSTKIAL  AFFAIRS. 

156.  The  Pony  Express.— In  April,  1859,  the  first  Pony 
Express  started  from  St.  Joseph,  Missouri,  across  Kansas, 

4.  The  Lawrence  Free  State  cannon,  Old  Sacramento,  had  been  buried 
at  the  close  of  the  Border  Warfare,  but  on  Kansas'  natal  day  it  was  dug 
up,  placed  on  Mt.  Oread,  and  made  to  participate  in  the  celebration.  It 
is  now  at  the  State  University. 


130 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


for  San  Francisco,  to  span  the  gap  which  then  existed 
between  the  Missouri  River  and  the  Pacific  coast.  The 
plan  was  to  carry  the  mail  on  horseback,  and,  as  rapid 
time  was  required,  relays  were  stationed  every  twenty- 
five  miles,  at  which  fresh  horses  and  riders  were  kept. 
The  mail  carrier,  mounted  on  a  spirited  Indian  pony, 
would  leave  St  Joseph  at  break-neck  speed  for  the  first 
relay  station,  swing  from  his  pony,  vault  into  the  saddle 
of  another  standing  ready,  and  dash  on  toward  the  next 
station.  At  every  third  relay  a  fresh  rider  took  the  mail. 
Through  rain  and  sunshine,  night  and  day,  over  mountain 
and  plain,  the  wild  rider  continued  solitary  and  alone. 
The  distance,  1,996  miles,  was  made  in  ten  days.  Then 
came  the  Wells  &  Fargo  Express,  next  the  Butterfield 
Overland  Stage  Company,  and  then  the  great  railways. 

157.  Drought  of  I860.— The  year  1860  was  a  notable 
one  for  the  nation  and  for  Kansas.  Aside  from  the  politi- 
cal strife  and  anxiety,  Kansas  witnessed  the  coming  of  the 
direst  natural  calamity  recorded  in 
the  country's  history,  ranking  with 
the  flood  of  '44.  From  June,  1859, 
until  November,  1860,  there  was  a 
widespread  drouth,  relieved  by  a  few 
local  showers.  Vegetation  perished 
save  the  prairie  grass,  which  during 
the  early  spring  and  midsummer 
flourished  along  the  ravines  and 
creeks,  and  even  when  dried  up  by 
the  hot  winds,  cured  suddenly  into  hay  and  so  afforded 
feed  for  cattle.    It  is  estimated  that  in  this  time  of  want 


Samuel    C.     Pomeroy. 


MAKING    THE    CONSTITUTION. 


131 


30,000  emigrants  left  the  country  west  of  the  Missouri, 
spreading  the  story  of  the  disaster.  In  time,  arrange- 
ments for  systematic  aid  for  Kansas  were  organized  in 
the  East.  Kansas  was  divided  into 
two  aid  districts,  S.  C.  Pomeroy  being 
placed  in  charge  of  Northern,  and 
W.  F.  M.  Arny^  of  Southern  Kansas. 
The  response  from  the  great  States 
of  New  York,  Wisconsin,  Indiana, 
Illinois,  and  Ohio  was  especially 
generous.  More  than  8,000,000  pounds 
of  provisions  and  clothing,  $85,000  in 
money,    and    2,500    bushels    of    seed  w.  f.  m.  Amy. 

wheat  were  received  by  the  constituted  ''aid"  authori- 
ties, and  great  amounts  of  ''aid  goods"  were  received 
from  churches,  societies  and  individuals." 

158.  Shadow  of  Coming  Events. — It  was  with  the 
shadow  of  great  j^rivation  still  hanging  over  the  State 
that  the  n^^w  State  Government  began  its  existence.  There 
had  been  civil  strife ;  the  steps  of  famine  had  followed, 
and  now  were  heard  in  the  near  distance  the  mutterings 
of  war,  which  was  to  wrap  the  Nation  in  smoke  and 
fiame.'^ 

.5.  In  .7uno.  1861,  ompty  fino-woven  sacks  could  be  found  in  every 
community,  all  marked  "W.  F.  M.,  Arny,  A^ont."  Later  on,  men  and 
bovs  could  b(>  seen  wearinfj  pnnts  {'.nd  coats  made  from  these  sacks,  with 
"W.  F.,"  or  "Arny"  or  "Agent"  in  sight. 

6.  General  S.  C.  Pomeroy  was  made  receiving  agent  at  Atchison. 
This  place  was  selected  on  account  of  its  being  the  only  railroad  station 
in  Kansas.  General  Pomeioy  devoted  his  whole  time  to  this  benevolent 
work,  and  no  man  could  have  l»een  more  vigilant,  industi-ious,  and  faithful 
than  be  in  the  discharge  of  the  oherous  ;^nd  trying  duties  assigned  to 
him. — Kansas    Historical    Collections,   Vol.    IX. 

7.  A  discussion  sprang  up  in  the  newspapers  as  to  the  first  school- 
master "abroad"  in  Kansas  after  its  organization  as  a  Territory.  J.  B. 
McAfee  claims  to  have  opened  the  Leavenworth  Collegiate  Institute   May 


132  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

Eeview  Questions. — Give  the  dates  of  the  administration  of 
Governor  Medary. — Where  was  the  State  Constitution  of  Kansas 
formed? — "What  was  the  model  after  which  it  was  patterned? — How 
did  the  members  of  the  convention  stand  on  the  slavery  question? — 
When  did  Kansas  receive  its  final  boundary? — Eeview  the  boundaries 
of  the  countries  which  have  included  Kansas  from  early  times  until 
1861. — What  can  you  say  of  the  character  of  the  men  of  the  con- 
vention?— Tell  of  Abraham  Lincoln  in  Kansas. — Give  a  summary  of 
the  work  of  the  Free  State  Party. — Where  did  the  Fifth  Territorial 
Legislature  meet? — Where  is  Kansas  Day  in  the  calendar,  and  why 
do  we  celebrate  it? — Tell  how  Lincoln  heralded  the  new  star  represent- 
ing Kansas  on  the  national  flag. — Do  you  consider  the  lines  of  Lowell 
prophetic  of  the  freedom  of  the  slave  in  the  nation? — Tell  of  the 
industrial  affairs  at  the  close  of  the  period. — Name  the  territorial 
capitals. — How  many  constitutions  were  formed? — How  many  terri- 
torial legislatures  assembled? — Give  a  summary  of  the  Topeka  gov- 
ernment. 

14,  1855.  Edward  P.  Fitch  is  named  as  having  opened  the  pioneer  school 
of  Kansas  at  Lawrence,  January  16,  1855.  Mr.  G.  W.  W.  Yates  notes 
as  the  oldest  country  school  that  at  the  Union  schoolhouse,  three  miles 
north  of  Lawrence,   begun   in   February,  1855. 


The    Old    Windmill    at    Lawrence. 


A  BRIEF  SUMMARY  OF  CERTAIN  SUBJECTS  OF 
THE  TERRITORIAL  PERIOD. 

THE  TRAGEDY  OF  JOHN  BEOWN. 


His  Migration  and  Settlement. — It  was  the  23(1  of  August, 
1855,  that  John  Brown,^  born  at  Torrington,  Conn.,  May  9,  1800,  a 
man  then  fifty-five  years  of  age,  started  from  Chicago,  HI.,  with 
a  heavily  loaded  one-horse  wagon  for  Kansas.  He  walked  beside 
his  wagon,  shot  game  for  food,  passed  through  Hlinois,  Iowa  and 
Missouri,  and  reached  a  point  on  or  near  Pottawatomie  creek, 
eight  miles  from  Osawatomie,  Kansas  Territory,  on  the  6th  of 
October,  1855.  He  settled  in  the  neighborhood  of  his  sons,  John 
Brown,  Jr.,  Salmon,  Frederick,  Jason,  and  Owen  Brown,  who  had 
come  to  the  territory  with  their  families  early  in  the  year.  From 
the  day  of  his  arrival,  his  name  became  attached,  for  weal  or  woe, 
for  glory  or  for  shame,  with  that  of  Kansas.  He  was  very  gen- 
erally known  first  as  ''Osawatomie  Brown." 

His  first  public  appearance  in  the  troubles 
of  the  Territory  appears  to  have  been  at  Law- 
rence during  the  "Wakarusa  War,"  in  Decem- 
ber, 1855.  That  disturbance  was  ended  by  a 
"ti-eaty,"  as  it  was  called,  but  "Osawatomie 
Brown"  wanted  no  treaty  and  counseled  re- 
sistance. On  the  24th  of  May,  1856,  five  Pro- 
slavery  settlers  on  Pottawatomie  creek  were 
killed.  This  was  the  "Pottawatomie  Mas- 
sacre," over  John  Brown's  complicity  in  which 
there  has  been  much  controversy.  John  Brown, 
when  asked  by  his  son,  Jason  Brown,  who  was 
horrified  by  the  deed,  "Father,  did  you  have 
anything  to  do  with  that  bloody  affair  on  the 
Pottawatomie?"  said,  "I  approved  it." 


John  Browa. 


1.  Personal  Memoirs  of  U.  S.  Grant:  "My  father  worked  for  and 
lived  in  the  family  of  Mr.  Brown,  the  father  of  John  Brown.  I  have 
often  heard  my  father  speak  of  John  Brown,  particularly  since  the  events 
at  Harper's  Ferry.  Brown  was  a  boy  when  they  lived  in  the  same  house, 
but  he  knew  him  afterwards,  and  regarded  him  as  a  man  of  great  purity 
of  character,  of  high  moral  and  physical  courage,  but  a  fanatic  and 
extremist  in  whatever  he  advocated." 

.133 


134  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

John  Brown  in  the  Field. — From  this  time  forward,  John  Brown 
may  be  said  to  have  taken  and  kept  the  field.  He  seldom  joined 
himself  with  what  may  be  called  the  masses  of  the  Free  State 
party.  He  did  not  aspire  to  the  civil  or  military  leadership  of 
that  party,  but,  with  a  small  and  chosen  company,  he  kept  the 
wood  and  prairie;  attacking  and  attacked.  A  few  days  after  the 
' '  Pottawatomie  Massacre, ' '  Captain  H.  Clay  Pate,  a  Deputy 
United  States  Marshal,  with  a  posse,  captured  John  Crown,  Jr., 
and  Jason  Brown.  They  were  turned  over  to  the  United  States 
troops  and  marched  to  Lecompton,  prisoners.  On  the  road  they 
were  treated  with  such  severity  that  John  Brown,  Jr.,  was  driven 
insane.  On  the  2d  of  June,  Captain  John  Brown,  at  Black  Jack, 
captured  Captain  Pate  and  twenty-eight  of  his  party,  and  held 
them  prisoners  till  they  were  taken  from  him  by  United  States 
troops,  but  treating  them,  as  Captain  Pate  himself  stated,  with 
humanity.  On  the  30th  of  August  occurred  the  second  attack  on 
Osawatomie.  John  Brown,  with  forty-two  men,  unavailingly 
fought  the  assailants,  the  town  was  burned,  and  his  son  Frederick 
was  shot  down   in   the  road. 

John  Brown  in  Massachusetts. — In  February  of  the  next  year, 
1857,  John  Brown  appeared  before  a  committee  of  the  Massa- 
chusetts Legislature  and  told  of  the  suffering  in  Kansas  as  he  had 
seen  it,  the  burnings,  the  robberies,  the  murders,  the  houseless 
people,  the  fire,  smoke  and  desolation. 

The  Liberator. — After  this  Eastern  visit  he  appeared  again  in 
Kansas,  made  a  raid  into  Missouri,  brought  out  fourteen  slaves, 
and  went  away  to  the  North  with  them.  The  Governor  of  Mis- 
souri offered  $3,000  reward  for  him,  and  the  President  of  the 
United  States  $250.  An  attempt  made  to  capture  Brown  on  his 
northward  way  at  Holton  was   a  failure. 

In  the  early  days  of  January,  there  appeared  in  a  Kansas 
paper,  the  ''Lawrence  Eepublican,"  a  communication  signed  by 
Brown,  and  usually  called  "John  Brown's  Parallels,"  It  was 
his  farewell  to  Kansas.  He  recited  his  action  in  carrying  off  the. 
slaves  from  Missouri,  and  contrasted  it  with  the  ' '  Marais  de 
Cygnes  Massacre,"  which  had  happened  in  the  May  previous. 
When  this  article  appeared.  Brown  had  gone  from  Kansas.  In 
March,  1859,  he  went  north  with  twelve  fugitive  slaves. 

He  returned  to  the  states  soon  after  his  triumphal  entry  into 
Canada  as  a  liberator;  went  with  not  more  than  twenty  men  to 
the  United  States  Arsenal  at  Harper's  Ferry,  Virginia,  too^  pos- 
session, and  extended  freedom  to  the  slaves  in  the  vicinity.  He 
had  hoped  to  incite  the  slaves  to  rise  and  demand  their  freedom. 
When  asked  by  what  authority  he  had  taken  public  property,  he 


JOHN  BKOWN.  135 

said,  ''By  the  authority  of  Almighty  God."  When  the  troops 
of  state  and  nation  entered  the  fort  after  a  brief  contest,  all 
the  insurgents  but  two  or  three  were  dead  or  wounded.  Brown, 
was  thrust  twice  with  a  sabre  but  not  killed. 

The  Defense. — On  the  1st  of  November,  1859,  John  Brown 
stood  up  in  court  at  Charlestown,  Virginia,  to  answer  if  he  might, 
why  sentence  of  death  should  not  be  passed  upon  him,  and  he  drew 
some  further  ' '  parallels. ' ' 

*'I  have  another  objection,  and  that  is,  that  it  is  unjust  that 
I  should  suffer  such  a  penalty.  Had  I  interfered  in  the  manner 
in  which  I  admit,  and  which  I  admit  has  been  fairly  proved  (for 
I  admire  the  truthfulness  and  candor  of  the  greater  portion  of 
the  witnesses  who  have  testified  in  this  case),  had  I  so  interfered 
in  behalf  of  the  rich,  the  powerful,  the  intelligent,  the  so-called 
great,  or  in  behalf  of  any  of  their  friends,  either  father,  or 
mother,  brother,  sister,  wife,  or  children,  or  any  of  that  class,  and 
suff"ered  and  sacrificed  what  I  have  in  this  interference,  it  would 
have  been  all  right,  and  every  man  in  this  court  would  have 
deemed  it  an  act  worthy  of  reward  rather  than  punishment. 

''This  court  acknowledges,  as  I  suppose,  the  validity  of  the  law 
of  God.  I  see  a  book  kissed  here  which  I  suppose  to  be  the  Bible, 
or,  at  least,  the  New  Testament.  That  teaches  me  that  all  things 
'Whatsoever  I  would  that  men  should  do  unto  me,  I  should  do 
even  so  to  them.'  It  teaches  me  further,  'to  remember  them 
that  are  in  bonds  as  bound  with  them, '  I  endeavored  to  act  up 
to  that  instruction.  I  say,  I  am  yet  too  young  to  understand  that 
God  is  any  respector  of  persons.  I  believe  that  to  have  interfered 
as  I  have  done,  as  I  have  always  freely  admitted  I  have  done, 
in  behalf  of  His  despised  poor,  was  not  wrong,  but  right.  Now, 
if  it  is  deemed  necessary  that  I  should  forfeit  my  life  for  the 
furtherance  of  the  ends  of  justice,  and  mingle  my  blood  further 
with  the  blood  of  my  children,  and  with  the  blood  of  millions  in 
this  slave  country,  whose  rights  are  disregarded  by  wicked,  cruel, 
and  unjust  enactments,  I  submit,  so  let  it  be  done. ' '  On  the 
2nd  of  December,  1859,  John  Brown  was  executed  at  Charles- 
town,    Va. 

In  Memory. — In  Kansas,  the  name  of  John  Brown  is  held  in 
remembrance  in  many  ways,  both  by  the  old  who  knew  his  face, 
and  the  young  who  have  but  heard  his  name.  In  1877  a  marble 
monument  was  reared  to  his  name  at  Osawatomie,  near  the  old 
field  of  fearful  odds.  In  the  collection  of  the  State  Historical 
Society  are  preserved  the  garments  he  wore,  and  some  of  the  last 
lines  he  is  known  to  have  written.  A  Kansas  poet,  Eugene  F. 
Ware,  has  written  of  him: 


136  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

From  boulevards, 

O'erlooking  both  Nyanzas, 
The  statued  bronze  shall  glitter  in  the  sun, 

With  rugged  lettering: 
''John  Brown  of  Kansas; 

He   dared  begin; 
He   lost. 
But  losing,  won. ' ' 


Golden  medal  presented  in  1874  to  Mrs.  Mary  A.   Brown,   widow  of  John  Brown, 
by   the   French    Government. 

On  October  21st,  1874,  a  letter  was  written  by  Victor  Hugo  to 
the  widow  and  children  of  John  Brown.  It  was  signed  by  nine 
other  Frenchmen,  who  represented  the  Republicans  of  France. 
With  this  letter  was  a  beautiful  gold  medal  bearing  the  likeness 
of  John  Brown  on  one  side  and  an  inscription  in  French  on  the 
other.  The  letter  and  medal  are  now  in  the  State  Historical 
Society  Museum.  A  free  translation  on  the  reverse  side  of  the 
John  Brown  medal  reads  as  follows:  ''To  the  memory  of  John 
Brown,  legally  assassinated  at  Charleston,  the  2d  of  December, 
1859,  and  to  that  of  his  sons  and  his  companions,  lifeless  victims 
to  the  cause  of  the  liberty  of  the  colored  people. ' ' 


TERRITORIAL   CAPITOLS. 

Kansas  Capitols. — A  history  of  the  various  edifices  which  have 
been  used  from  time  to  time  for  Kansas  capitols,  Territorial  and 
State,  would  serve  as  a  thread  on  which  to  string  a  political 
history  of  Kansas,  and,  moreover,  a  sketch  of  the  material  prog- 
ress of  the  country. 

Fort  Leavenworth. — The  first  capital  of  Kansas,  the  first 
executive  office,  at  least,  was  at  Fort  Leavenworth.  Here,  in 
obedience  to  his  instructions  from  Washington,  came  Andrew  H. 
Reeder,  first  Governor  of  Kansas  Territory.  He  was  assigned 
quarters  in  a  brick  building  on  the  west  side  of  the  parade.  The 
executive   office   was   in   a   stone  building  belonging   to   the   quar- 


TERRITOEIAL  CAPITOLS.  137 

termaster's  department.  It  was  furnished  with  republican  sim- 
plicity. Here  the  Governor,  who  had  taken  the  oath  of  office  in 
Washington,  administered  the  obligation  to  his  associates  in  the 
Territorial  Government  as  they,  one  after  another,  arrived.  Here 
he  issued  commissions  and  proclamations,  and  on  one  occasion 
held  court  as  a  justice  of  the  peace. 

Shawnee  Mission. — After  fifty  days'  experience  at  Fort  Leav- 
enworth, Governor  Reeder,  on  the  24th  of  November,  1854,  re- 
moved the  seat  of  government  to  the  Shawnee  Manual 
Labor  School,  commonly  called  the  Shawnee  Mission,  located  one 
mile  from  the  Missouri  line,  two  and  one-half  miles  from  West- 
port,  Mo.,  and  seven  miles  from  Kansas  City. 

Somewhat  reluctantly,  Eeverend  Mr.  Johnson  and  his  wife 
received  as  guests  the  Governor  and  the  larger  number  of  the 
Territorial  officers,  and  saw  the  mission  appropriated  in  part  as 
the  capitol  of  Kansas.  The  winter  of  1854-55  passed  quietly  at 
the  Mission.  The  Governor  and  his  associates  doubtless  watching 
with  interest  the  operations  of  the  Mission,  which  was  then  at 
the  height  of  its  prosperity,  with  between  200  and  300  Indian 
boys  and  girls  in  attendance,  who  studied  their  books,  and,  be- 
sides, labored  on  the  fine  farm  of  1,900  acres,  and  worked  in  the 
shops  and  the  mill.  The  Territorial  officers  boarded  with  the 
Mission  family,  as  later  on  did  many  of  the  members  and  officers 
of  the  Legislature. 

Pawnee. — April  16,  1855,  Governor  Reeder  called  for  the  con- 
vention of  the  Territorial  Legislature  July  2,  at  Pawnee,  near 
Fort  Riley.  There  was  little  at  Pawnee,  except  a  stone  house,  the 
ruins  of  which  are  still  visible.  Yet  that  stone  house  was  the 
first  '^  capitol  building"  of  Kansas.  The  Legislature  refused  to 
remain  at  Pawnee,  and  re-located  at  Shawnee  Mission.  Pawnee 
came  to  immediate  grief.  The  site  was  declared  to  be  within 
the  military  reservation  of  Fort  Riley,  and  the  settlers  were 
removed  by  the  soldiers. 

Shawnee  Mission. — The  Legislature,  again  ensconced  at  the 
Shawnee  Mission,  proceeded  to  perform  the  acts  which  acquired 
for  it  the  title,  with  the  Free  State  people,  of  the  ''Bogus  Legis- 
lature. ' ' 

Governor  Reeder  remained  with  it  officially  but  a  short  time, 
only  four  days,  at  the  end  of  which  he  informed  the  body  that 
he  had  been  removed.  He  remained  a  short  time  longer  as  a 
spectator. 

To  Shawnee  Mission  came  the  second  Territorial  Governor, 
Wilson  Shannon,  and  the  executive  office  was  maintained  there 
until   the   spring  of   1856. 


138  '  ■  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

Lecompton  Chosen. — A  joint  session  of  the  Legislature  m 
August,  1855,  located  the  permanent  capital  at  Lecompton. 

The  second  Territorial  Legislature  which  assembled  at  Le- 
compton, January  12,  1857,  met  in  a  frame  house,  which  had  been 
built  for  its  occupancy  by  Mr.  William  Nace.  The  national  ad- 
ministration, however,  was  determined  on  Lecompton  as  a  capital, 
and  Congress  made  a  liberal  appropriation  for  a  capitol  building, 
which  rose  only  to  the  height  of  the  foundation,  but  was  sufficient 
to  consume  the  appropriation.  The  foundation  was  afterwards 
occupied  by  the  building  of  Lane  University.  The  frame  house 
on  Elm  street  was  the  meeting  place  of  the  Lecompton  Constitu- 
tional Convention,  which  gave  the  structure  the  name  of  Constitu- 
tional Hall.  The  second  Legislature  held  its  entire  session  at 
Lecompton,  but  the  third  Legislature,  which  entertained  different 
political  convictions,  adjourned  to  Lawrence,  which  was  there- 
after virtually  the  capital,  the  successive  Legislatures  meeting 
at  Lecompton,  and  adjourning  at  once  to  Lawrence. 

In  Lawrence. — Lawrence  furnished  two  ''capitols"  in  which 
the  Legislature  met.  One  is  described  by  the  local  historian  as 
the  ''new  brick  building,  just  south  of  the  Eldridge  House,"  of 
which  the  two  houses  occupied  the  second  and  third  floors,  the 
other  was  ' '  the  old  concrete  building  on  Massachusetts  street, 
north  of  Winthrop. ' '  In  Lawrence  met,  in  1861,  the  last  of  the 
Territorial  Legislatures. 

CONSTITUTIONS. 

Constitutions. — Four  'constitutions  were  formed  in  Kansas. 
The  Topeka  Constitution  passed  the  House,  but  failed  to  pass  the 
Senate.  The  Lecompton  Constitution  passed  both  Houses  of 
Congress,  but  failed  to  be  confirmed  by  the  people  of  Kansas. 
The  Leavenworth  Constitution  was  never  voted  on  by  either  House 
of  Congress,  The  Wyandotte  Constitution  was  the  constitution 
under  which  Kansas  was  admitted.  All  but  the  Lecompton  Con- 
stitution prohibited  slavery. 

Territorial  Legislatures. — Thqje  were  five  Territorial  Legisla- 
tures. The  first  met  at  Pawnee  and  adjourned  to  Shawnee  Mis- 
sion. The  second  met  at  Lecompton.  These  were  both  Pro-slavery. 
The  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  met  at  Lecompton,  and  adjourned  to 
Lawrence.     The  last  three  were  Free  State. 

The  Topeka  Government. — The  first  act  of  the  movement  for 
the  Topeka  Government  was  the  election  of  delegates  to  the 
Topeka    Constitutional    Convention    October    1,    1855.      The    con- 


THE  CONSTITUTIONS.  139 

vention  met  October  23,  and  completed  the  constitution  Novem- 
ber 11.  It  was  voted  on  by  the  people  December  15,  and  a  ma- 
jority of  votes  cast  were  in  its  favor.  The  Pro-slavery  party 
did  not  vote. 

On  January  15,  1856,  State  officers,  under  the  constitution,  were 
elected,  Charles  Eobinson  was  made  governor.  On  March  4, 
1856,  the  first  session  of  the  Topeka  Legislature  was  held. 

On  March  24,  1856,  the  Topeka  Constitution  was  presented  to 
Congress.     It  failed  to  pass  the   Senate. 

On  July  4,  1856,  the  Topeka  Legislature  was  disbanded  by 
order  of  Jefferson  Davis  and  Acting  Governor  Woodson.  In 
January,  1857,  the  Legislature  reassembled,  but  its  officers  were 
arrested. 

In  January,  1858,  the  Legislature  met  and  adjourned  to 
Lawrence. 

On  March  4,  1858,  the  Legislature  met  at  Topeka,  but  there 
being  no   quorum,   adjourned. 


THE    PERIOD   OF   STATEHOOD. 


WHAT  CONSTITUTES  A  STATE. 

What  constitutes  a  state? 
Not  high-raised  battlement  or  labored  mound, 

Thick  wall  or  moated  gate; 
Not  cities  proud  with  spires  and  turrets  crowned; 

Not  bays  and  broad-armed  ports, 
Where  low-browed  baseness  wafts  perfume  to  pride. 

No!     men,  high-minded  men. 
With  powers  as  far  above  dull  brutes  endued 

In  forest,  brake,  or  den. 
As  beasts  excel  cold  rocks  and  brambles  rude, — 

Men  who  their  duties  know. 
And  know  their  rights,  and  knowing,  dare  maintain, 

Prevent  the  long-aimed  blow. 
And  crush  the  tyrant  while  they  rend  the  chain; 

These  constitute  a  state; 
And  sovereign  law,  that  state's  collected  will, 

O  'er  thrones  and  globes  elate, 
Sits  empress,  crowning  good,  repressing  ill. 

— Sir  William  Jones. 


STATE    CONSTRUCTION. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

GOVEENOR  EOBINSON'S  ADMINISTRATION. 

1861—1863. 

* '  Of  all  the  states,  but  three  will  live  in  story : 
Old  Massachusetts  "vvith  her  Plymouth  Rock, 
And  Old  Virginia  with  her  noble  stock, 
And  Sunny  Kansas  with  her  woes  and  glory. ' ' 

159.  The  State.— On  January  29, 
1861,  Dr.  Robinson  took  the  oath  of 
governor;  the  "ship  of  state"  was 
launched  and  Kansas  with  all  her 
thrilling  history  of  the  past,  all  her 
hopes  for  future  years  began  the  life 
of  statehood  in  the  great  Republic 


Governor    Charles    Robinson. 


THE    FIRST    LEGISLATURE    OF    THE    STATE. 

160.  Place  of  Meeting. — The  first  State  Legislature 
met  at  Topeka,  the  temporary  capital  designated  by  the 
Wyandotte  Constitution,  on  the  26th  of  March,  1861. 

The  infant  State  possessed  no  buildings  of  its  own. 
The  House  assembled  in  the  Ritchie  Block,  which  then 
stood  on  the  southeast  corner  of  Sixth  and  Kansas.  Ave- 
nues, and  the  Senate  in  the  Gale  Block,  a  short  distance 
south.  The  inconveniences  of  a  leaky  roof  forced  an 
adjournment  of  the  House  to  the  Congregational  Church, 
where  it  concluded  its  sessions.  The  Legislature  organ- 
ized with  Lieutenant-Governor  Root  as  President  of  the 
Senate,  and  Honorable  W.  W.  Updegraff  as  Speaker  of 
the  House. 

141 


142 


HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 


161.  Election  of  United  States  Senators. — On  the  4th 

of  April  the  Legislature  elected  the  first  two  United 
States  Senators  from  the  State  of  Kansas.  There  was  but 
one  ballot,  and  there  were  many  changes  of  votes.  James 
H.  Lane  and  Samuel  C.  Pomeroy  were  chosen. 

162.  Legislative  Acts. — The  Legislature  remained  in 
session  until  June.  Its  most  important  act  was  authoriz- 
ing the  issue  of  $15D,000  in  bonds  to  meet  the  current 
expenses  of  the  State.  Its  most  interesting  historical 
act  was  the  adoption  of  the  great  seal  of  the  State, ^  for 
which   many  designs   were   offered.     The   most   striking 


Seal    of    Kansas. 


leature  of  the  design  chosen  is  the  motto,  Ad  Astra  per 
Aspera,  with  which  every  Kansas  child  is  familiar,  and 
which  was  the  suggestion  of  Honorable  John  James 
Ingalls. 

The  main  business  of  the  first  Legislature  of  Kansas 

1.  The  design  for  a  State  seal  submitted  by  .Tohn  .T.  Ingalls  con- 
sisted of  a  blue  shield,  a  cloud  at  the  base,  out  of  which  rose  a  single 
star,  toward  a  constellation  of  34  stars.  It  was  symbolic  of  one  state 
coming  up  out  of  its  strife  to  join  the  other  34  states.  Above,  the  Latin 
motto,  "Ad  astra  per  aspera,"  "to  the  stars  through  difficulties,"  was 
very  suggestive.     The  simple  unique  design  of  Mr.   Ingalls   was  modified 


STATE    CONSTRUCTION.  143 

was  with  war.  A  company  was  formed  of  officers  and 
members  of  the  Legislature,  which,  during  the  recess,  day 
after  day,  was  drilled  by  a  member  who  had  attended  a 
military  school  and  knew  something  of  military  tactics. 
A  bill  was  passed  for  the  organization  of  the  state  militia. 

163.  Topeka  the  Capital. — The  Legislature  also  pro- 
vided for  an  election  to  be  held  on  the  5th  of  November, 
1861,  to  determine  the  location  of  the  State  capital. 
Topeka  received  7,996  votes,  Lawrence  5,291,  all  others 
1,184.     Topeka  was  declared  the  capital. 

KANSAS  IN  THE  CIVIL  WAE. 

164.  Kansas  Patriotism. — The  first  year  of  Kansas  as 
a  State,  found  her  "soul  in  arms,  and  eager  for  the  fray." 
It  may  be  said  that  for  the  four  years  that  succeeded 
the  firing  on  Fort  Sumter,  the  thought,  the  occupation, 
the  experience  of  Kansas  was  war.  Everything  gave 
place  to  meeting  the  responsibilities,  and  enduring  the 
anxieties,  sufferings,  and  losses  of  war. 

There  was  never  in  the  course  of  the  struggle  a  man 
drafted  in  the  State  of  Kansas,  nor  was  there  ever  a 
bounty  offered  either  by  the  State,  or  any  city  or  county 
in  the  State.  Troops  were  raised  continually  as  called  for 
from  the  first  to  the  last.- 

165.  Kansas  Responds  to  Lincoln's  Call. — On  the  15th 
of  April  President  Lincoln  issued  his  first  call  for  75,000 
men. 

and  marred  by  the  addition  of  prairie  landscape,  buffalo  pursued  by 
Indian  hu.nters,  a  settler's  cabin,  'a  river  with  a  steamboat  (the  most 
un-Kansas  like  feature  of  all)  and  above  a  rising  sun  a  cluster  of  34 
stars. 

2.  The  United  States  census  of  18G0  gave  Kansas  143,643  inhabitants, 
of  whom  34,242   were   in   the   vicinity    of   Pike's   Peak.      This   population 


144  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

On  the  22nd  of  April  the  Legislature  passed  an  act  for 
the  organization  of  the  militia.  Under  the  act,  Governor 
Eobinson  organized  180  companies,  divided  into  two  divi- 
sions, four  brigades  and  eleven  regiments.  On  the  17th 
of  April,  five  days  after  the  firing  on  Sumter,  Captain 
Samuel  Walker,  of  Lawrence,  tendered  Governor  Robin- 
son a  company  of  one  hundred  men.  Within  a  week  seven 
military  companies  had  been  formed  in  Douglas  county 
alone. 

By  the  end  of  the  month  companies  had  been  formed  in 
nearly  every  county.  In  the  latter  days  of  May  the 
organization  of  the  First  Kansas  Volunteers  was  begun 
in  Leavenworth.  On  the  3d  of  June,  a  party  of  volunteers 
from  the  First  Kansas  crossed  the  Missouri  River  from 
Leavenworth  to  latan,  on  the  Missouri  side,  and  cap- 
tured a  Confederate  flag.  In  the  affair  three  men  were 
wounded.  This  was  the  first  Kansas  blood  shed  in  the 
Civil  War. 

166.  Kansas  Volunteers  Organized. — The  volunteer 
organizations  sworn  into  the  service  of  the  United  States 
were :  The  First,  Second,  Eighth,  Tenth,  Twelfth,  Thir- 
teenth, and  Seventeenth  Infantry,  and  First  and  Second 
Colored  Infantry.  The  Second,  Fifth,  Sixth,  Seventh, 
Ninth,  Eleventh,  Fourteenth,  Fifteenth,  and  Sixteenth 
Cavalry.  The  First,  Second,  and  Third  Batteries,  and 
Independent  Colored  Battery. 

167.  The  Frontier  Guard.^The  Frontier  Guard  was 
a  body  of  men,  who,  for  fifteen  days,  from  April  18  to 

was  greatly  diminished  by  the  "drought  of  1860."  The  entire  quota 
assigned  to  Kansas  during  the  Civil  War  was  16,654  men,  and  the 
number  raised  was  20,097 ;  thus  Kansas  furnished  a  surplus  of  3,433 
men. 


STATE    CONSTRUCTION. 


145 


Samuel 


Greer. 


May  3,  1861,  before  many  troops  had  reached  the  City  of 
Washington,  guarded  the  White 
House  and  President  Lincoln.  The 
Guard  was  commanded  by  General 
James  H.  Lane.  Mark  W.  Delahay, 
D.  R.  Anthony,  Marcus  J.  Parrott, 
A.  C.  Wilder,  Samuel  W.  Greer,  and 
many  other  Kansas  men  belonged 
to  it. 

168.  The  War  in  Kansas. — Kansas 
was  open  to  attack  on  the  east  and 
south,  while  on  the  west,  the  Indians  served  as  a  per- 
petual menace.  The  soldiers  of  Kansas  were  called  alter- 
nately to  repel  invasion,  and  to  penetrate  the  fastnesses 
of  the  enemy.  The  war  was  waged  in  a  wide  and  almost 
wilderness  country;  a  country  of  mountains,  defiles,  tan- 
gled woods  and  canebrakes,  traversed  by  countless 
streams,  rapid  and  roaring,  or  deep,  winding  and  slug- 
gish; but,  for  the  most  part,  without  bridges  or  ferries. 
In  the  thousands  of  miles  of  marching  the  Kansas  sol- 
diers often  saw  not  a  rod  of  smooth  and  settled  highway ; 
they  moved  by  trails,  over  the  hills  and  far  away  across 
the  prairies,  guided  by  the  sun,  the  distant  and  random 
gun,  the  smoke  of  combat  or  the  vengeful  burning.  They 
were-  far  from  the  region  of  great  and  decisive  battles, 
of  strategic  combinations  and  foreseen  results. 

The  columns  came  and  went,  making  forced  marches 
for  days  and  nights  together;  fighting  a  battle  and  win- 
ning a  dear  bought  victory,  to  return  whence  they  came. 
They  fought,  and  marched,  and  camped  in  a  region  that 
was   neither    North   nor    South,    and    so    experienced    a 


146  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

climate  with  the  evil  features  of  both.  They  met  the 
blinding  sleet  and  snow;  were  drenched  with  tropical 
rainstorms,  and  braved  alike  the  blazing  fury  of  the  sun, 
and  the  bitter  malice  of  the  frost.  Far  from  their  bases 
of  supplies,  food  and  powder  must  be  brought  a  long, 
toilsome  and  dangerous  way,  guarded  at  every  step, 
fought  for  at  every  ford  and  pass.  It  was  a  hard  and 
desperate  warfare.  For  Kansas,  the  Civil  War  was  but 
the  continuation  of  the  border  troubles.  Along  the  border 
the  war  assumed  the  character  of  a  vendetta — a  war  of 
revenge,  and  over  all  the  wide  field  a  war  of  combats,  of 
ambushes  and  ambuscades,  of  swift  advances  and  hurried 
retreats ;  of  spies  and  scouts ;  of  stealth,  darkness  and 
murder.  All  along  the  way  men  riding  solitary  were  shot 
down;  little  companies  were  killed  by  their  camp  fires; 
men  fighting  on  both  sides  neither  asked,  gave,  nor  ex- 
pected mercy. 

169.  Kansas  Troops  in  Missouri.— The  first  regiment 
to  leave  the  soil  of  Kansas  was  the  First  Kansas  Infantry, 
under  command  of  Colonel  George  Deitzler,  which  moved 
from   Leavenworth    to    Kansas    City,  ..-— ^    . 

Missouri,  in  June,  1861.  The  Second, 
under  Colonel  Robert  Mitchell  from 
Lawrence  followed,  and  later,  both 
regiments  became  a  brigade  of  the 
army  of  General  Nathaniel  Lyon,  un- 
der command  of  Colonel  Dietzler.  On 
the  10th  of  August,  1861,  this  Kansas 
brigade    stood    in    battle    array    on 

"Bloody     Hill,"     and    fought     out     theG^^^^-al  George  W.  Deltzler. 

engagement  of  Wilson's  Creek,  where  1,200  Union  soldiers 


STATE    CONSTRUCTION. 


147 


General  Rob't  B.  Mitchell. 


were  killed.     The  Second  was  the  last  regiment  to  leave 
the  field. 

170.  Additional  Regiments  Raised. — Shortly  after  the 
battle  of  Wilson's  Creek,  it  was  reported  that  General 
Price  had  organized  a  column  for  a  demonstration  against 
Fort  Scott.     This  increased  the  inter- 
est in  the  organization  of  the  Third, 
Fifth,  Sixth  and  Seventh  Kansas  Regi- 
ments, of  which,  on  the  day  of  Wil- 
son's Creek,  scarcely  a  battalion  for 
each  had  been  recruited.     The  com- 
panies in   Southern  Kansas  were   or- 
dered   to    rendezvous  at  Fort  Scott, 
and  most  of  the  companies  in  North- 
ern  Kansas   were    equipped   at   Fort 
Leavenworth. 

By  the  middle  of  August,  what  came  to  be  known  as 
Lane's  Kansas  Brigade,  composed  of  the  Third  and 
Fourth  Kansas  Infantry,  the  Fifth,  Sixth  and  Seventh 
Kansas  Cavalry,  numbering  in  all  2,500  men,  was  organ- 
ized. To  the  brigade  was  attached  the  First  Kansas, 
Battery. 

171.  Price  Threatens  Kansas. — On  the  1st  of  Septem- 
ber, General  Price's  Confederate  advance,  under  General 
Rains,  had  reached  Drywood,  twelve  miles  south  of  Fort 
Scott,  and  a  scouting  party  came  in  and  drove  off  a  herd 
of  United  States  mules,  grazing  within  two  miles  of  the 
post.  This  piece  of  audacity  led  to  the  advance  of  a 
Union  force,  under  Colonels  Jennison  and  Johnson,  and 
a  sharp  skirmish  at  Drywood.  After  this  came  various 
movements,  including  the  withdrawal  of  the  Union  forces 


148  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

fifom  Fort  Scott  in  the  direction  of  the  Little  Osage,  and 
the  throwing  up  of  the  work  known  as  Fort  Lincoln.  In 
the  midst  of  the  preparations  for  defense  came  the  intel- 
ligence that  General  Price  had  abandoned  his  proposed 
invasion  of  Kansas,  and  had  marched  in  the  direction  of 
Lexington,  Missouri.  General  Price  accomplished  his 
march  to  the  Missouri  River,  and  forced  the  surrender 
of  Colonel  Mulligan  and  2,500  men  at  Lexington. 

172.  The  Burning  of  Osceola. — The  Kansas  Brigade, 
James  Lane  in  command,  operated  on  the  left  flank  of 
Price's  army.  Colonel  Judson  of  Lane's  army,  on  the 
23rd  of  September,  attacked  Osceola,  Missouri,  where  a 
quantity  of  supplies  had  been  accumulated  for  the  enemy. 
These,  with  Osceola,  were  burned.  Upon  the  advance  of 
General  Fremont  with  a  large  force  General  Price  re- 
treated back  to  Arkansas.  The  Kansas  Brigade  then 
moved  to  Kansas  City. 

173.  Service  of  the  Indians. — In  the  early  days  of 
1862,  more  than  6,000  Indians  in  the  Indian  Territory 
adhered  to  the  Government  of  the  United  States,  drew 

together  and  fought  the  Indians  who 
had  joined  the  Confederacy,  and  several 
regiments  of  Texas  Cavalry.  In  the 
dead  of  winter,  in  the  midst  of  a  driv- 
ing snow-storm,  the  loyal  Indians,  with 
their  aged  chief,  Hopoeithleyohola, 
fell  back  into  Kansas.  In  their  camps, 
on  Fall  River,  they  suffered  greatly 
during  the  winter,  but  in  the  spring 
Colonel  w.  A.  rhiiiips. -j^j^ree  mounted  regiments  were  organ- 
ized from  these  Indians.     They  were  officered  from  Kan- 


STATE    CONSTEUCTION. 


149 


sas  regiments,  many  of  the  officers  being  from  the  Tenth 
Kansas,  and  later  served  in  an  Indian  brigade  commanded 
by  Colonel  AVilliam  A.  Phillips. 

174.  Consolidation  of  Forces.— In  March,  1862,  the 
Third  and  Fourth  Kansas  Infantry,  and  a  portion  of  the 
Fifth  Kansas  Cavalry,  were  consolidated  at  Paola  as  the 
Tenth  Kansas  Infantry.  Colonel  Montgomery,  of  the 
Third,  was  transferred  to  the  Second  South  Carolina 
Regiment,  and  Colonel  Weer,  of  the  Fourth,  assumed  the 
command  of  the  new  organization.  The  numbers  ' '  Third ' ' 
and  ''Fourth"  do  not  again  appear  in  Kansas  military 
history.  In  May,  1862,  the  First,  Seventh  and  Eighth 
Kansas  Regiments  left  Leavenworth  for  Corinth,  Missis- 
sippi. 

175.  The  Colored  Soldiers. — In  November,  the  First 
Kansas  colored  regiment  was  organized  at  Fort  Lincoln. 
Kansas  now  had  soldiers  white,  red  and  black. 

176.  Kansas  Troops  in  Arkansas. — On  the  5th  of  De- 
cember, 1862,  General  James  G.  Blunt  joined  his  force  to 
the  already  battling  army  of  General  Herron,  and  fought 
till  the  sun  went  down  in  the  battle  of 
Prairie  Grove,  Arkansas.  On  this 
field  were  gathered  the  largest  num- 
ber of  Kansas  troops,  up  to  that  time 
ever  drawn  together. 

177.  The  Second  State  Election.— 
In  November,  1862,  the  second  State 
election  in  Kansas  occurred.  Thomas 
Carney,  Republican,  was  chosen  Gov- 
ernor, and  A.  Carter  Wilder  Repre- 
sentative in  Congress.     The  Democratic  Party  made  no 


ter    Wilder. 


150  ~  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

nomination  for  governor.     The  Republican  Union  Party 

had  nominated  W.  R.  Wagstaff. 

> 

Eeview  Questions. — Why  is  Kansas  Day  a  day  of  special  sig- 
nificance, not  only  in  the  State  but  also  in  the  nation? — Where  and 
when  did  the  Eirst  Legislature  meet? — Who  were  our  first  United 
States  senators? — When  and  how  was  Topeka  made  the  capital? — 
Describe  the  seal. — What  is  the  meaning  of  ''Ad  astra  per  aspera"? 
— How  did  the  people  of  Kansas  reveal  their  patriotism  at  the  open- 
ing of  the  Civil  War? — What  remarkable  statement  is  made  as  to 
volunteer  service? — What  was  the  Frontier  Guard? — Give  the  charac- 
teristics of  the  War  in  Kansas. — In  what  famous  battle  in  Missouri 
did  the  Kansas  troops  engage? — How  did  General  Price  threaten 
Kansas? — Some  people  consider  the  burning  of  Osceola  an  atrocious 
deed,  do  you? — How  did  the  Indian  and  colored  soldiers  serve  in  the 
War? 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 


GOVEENOR  CARNEY'S  ADMINISTRATION. 

1863—1865. 

178.  The  Legislatures  of  1863  and  1864.— In  the  midst 
of  war's  alarms,  Kansas  began  the  founding  of  her  great 
educational  system.  The  Legislature  of  1863  made  itself 
memorable  by  its  remarkable  work 
for  education.  The  University  which 
Amos  A.  Lawrence  in  1856  had  pro- 
moted was  made  a  State  University. 
The  State  JNormal  School  for  the  in- 
struction of  teachers,  was  established 
at  Emporia.  This  was  the  first  state 
institution  of  its  kind  in  the  United 
States  and  shows  an  advance  position 

in     educational    thinking.        The     State  Governor   Thomas   Carney. 

Agricultural  College  was  founded  in  Riley  County,  the 
state  receiving  the  land  of  Blumont  College,  near  Man- 
hattan. Its  purpose  is  to  teach  such  branches  of  learning 
as  relate  to  agricultural  and  mechanical  arts.  Other 
scientific  and  classical  studies  are  included  in  the  curric- 
ulum ;  and  military  tactics  is  a  requirement. 

This  legislature  also  incorporated  the  Atchison,  Topeka 
and  Santa  Fe  Railroad  Company,  located  the  first  State 
Insane  Asylum  at  Osawatomie  and  provided  for  the  build- 
ing of  a  penitentiary  at  Lansing.    The  Legislature  of  1864 

151 


152  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

located  the  State  Deaf  and  Dumb  Asylum  at  Olathe,  and 
the  Blind  Asylum  at  Wyandotte,  and  organized  the  State 
University  and  the  State  Normal  School. 

179..  Kansas  Troops  in  Indian  Territory. — In  1863,  the 
Kansas  fighting  was  transferred  to  the  Indian  Territory. 
Colonel  William  A.  Phillips  with  his  Indians  fought  Col- 
onel Coffey  at  Fort  Gibson,  now  Fort  Blunt.  Colonel 
James  M.  Williams,  with  the  First  Kansas,  colored,  800 
strong,  and  300  Indians,  defeated  General  Stand  Watie 
at  Cabin  Creek. 

QUANTRILL'S  EAID. 

180.  Kansas'  Position. — Kansas,  during  the  war,  was 
exposed  to  three  species  of  invasion  and  calamity:  first, 
to  the  hostile  approach  of  the  regular  forces  of  the  Con- 
federacy; second,  to  the  raid§  of  Indians;  and,  third,  to 
the  attacks  of  guerrillas,  irregular  troops,  the  scourge 
and  curse  of  war.  These  predatory  rangers,  whose  occu- 
pation was  robbery,  and  whose  pastime  was  murder,  kept 
the  country  in  terror.  The  places  chosen  were  those  with- 
out defences  or  garrison,  where  it  was  possible  to  plun- 
der and  kill  with  comparative  safety.  The  most  appalling 
of  these  disasters  was  Quantrill's  raid  on  Lawrence,  on 
the  morning  of  the  21st  of  August,  1863. 

181.  The  Attack  a  Surprise. — It  is  remarkable  that 
Lawrence,  a  town  which  had  served  as  a  rendezvous  for 
troops  through  the  war,  should,  on  that  morning,  have 
had  at  hand  no  single  armed  military  organization  for  its 
defense,  and  that  an  attacking  force  of  between  300  and 
400  men  should  have  ridden  through  forty  miles  of  set- 
tled country  from  the  Missouri  border,  without  a  single 


STATE    CONSTEUCTION.  153 

I. 
messenger  reaching  the  doomed  place  with  word  of  warn- 
ing. At  one  point  a  Federal  force  was  passed  by  the 
guerrillas,  their  character  made  out,  and  word  was  sent 
to  Kansas  City,  but  not  to  Lawrence.  It  was  five  o'clock 
in  the  still,  summer  morning  when  drowsy  Lawrence  was 
wakened  by  vengeful  yells,  the  crash  of  revolvers,  and  the 
pattering  hoofs  of  horses.  There  was  no  defence.  There 
were  no  defenders.  The  soldiers  in  the  town  were  but  a 
small  body  of  recruits  who  were  in  camp,  but  had  not 
yet  received  arms.  These  were  destroyed  by  what  might 
be  called  a  single  volley.  The  militia  company  of  the 
place  had  stored  their  arms  in  their  armory,  and  could  not 
reach  them. 

182.  The  Massacre. — There  was  first  the  hurried 
charge,  the  guerrillas  firing  on  whoever  they  saw  as  they 
rode  past,  and  afterward  the  deliberate  and  painstaking 
massacre,  house  by  house,  and  man  by  man,  which  lasted 
for  four  hours.  As  is  often  the  case  in  seasons  of  terror, 
the  women  displayed  the  highest  courage,  struggling  with 
their  bare  hands  to  save  their  homes  from  the  flames, 
their  sons  and  husbands  from  the  swarming  murderers. 
The  town  was  robbed  and  burned,  the  black  smoke  rising 
in  a  great  cloud  in  the  still  air.  The  Eldridge  House, 
the  successor  of  the  old  Free  State  Hotel,  burned  in  1856, 
was  specially  devoted  to  the  flames.  The  safeguard  given 
the  guests  and  inmates  of  this  hotel  by  Quantrill  himself, 
was  the  one  ray  of  mercy  that  illumined  the  darkness  of 
the  time.  These  were  protected  while  he  remained  in  the 
town. 

The  guerrillas,  loaded  with  plunder,  left  unmolested. 
They  avoided  places  that  looked  defensible,  and  a  few 


154 


HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 


Union  soldiers  on  the  north  side  of  the  river,  firing  across 
the  stream,  kept  the  neighborhood  near  the  river  bank 
cleared  of  enemies.  There  was  no  seeking  for  a  combat. 
Those  who  were  killed  were  non-combatants  who  died 
without  an  opportunity  for  defense.  As  the  enemy  drew 
off,  General  Lane  and  Lieutenant  John  K.  Rankin  gath- 
ered a  handful  of  men,  only  sufficient  in  force  to  keep 
the  enemy  moving,  and  started  in  pursuit. 


Eldridge    House    Ruins. 

183.  Estimate  of  the  Killed. — To  this  day  the  count  of 
the  dead  and  wounded  on  that  fatal  day  varies.  Mr. 
Speer  estimates  that  183  men  and  boys  were  killed.  Dr. 
Cordley  says:  ^'The  number  killed  can  never  be  exactly 
known.  As  nearly  as  can  be  ascertained  there  were  142. 
This  included  the  missing  two  or  three  who  never  re- 
turned.    A  few  of  the  wounded  died  later,  and  possibly 


STATE    CONSTRUCTION.  155 

some  were  killed  who  were  never  heard  of.  One  hun- 
dred and  fifty  would  not  be  far  out  of  the  way  for  the 
whole  number.  It  is  estimated  that  the  raid  made  eighty 
widows  and  250  orphans."^ 

The  inscription  on  the  citizens'  memorial  monument, 
raised  in  1895  in  Oak  Hill  cemetery,  reads:  "Dedicated 
to  the  memory  of  the  150  citizens,  who,  defenceless,  fell 
victims  to  the  inhuman  ferocity  of  border  guerrillas,  led 
by  the  infamous  Quantrill  in  his  raid  upon  Lawrence, 
August  21,  1863." 

184.  The  Burial. — Nearly  a  week  was  filled  with  the 
gathering  up  and  burial  of  the  dead.  Fifty-three  bodies 
were  laid  in  one  trench. 

On  the  Sunday  following  the  massacre,  there  was  held 
in  the  old  stone  Congregational  Church  a  service  by  the 
pastor.  Rev.  Dr.  Cordley,  and  Rev.  G.  C.  Morse  of  Em- 
poria, whose  brother-in-law.  Judge  Carpenter,  was  among 
the  slain.  There  was  no  sermon,  but  instead  there  was 
read  the  79th  Psalm:  "0  God,  the  heathen  are  come  into 
their  inheritance.  They  have  laid  Jerusalem  in  heaps. 
The  dead  bodies  of  thy  servants  have  they  given  to  be 
meat  unto  the  fowls  of  the  heaven,  and  the  flesh  of  thy 
saints  unto  the  beasts  of  the  earth.  Their  blood  have 
they  shed  like  water  round  about  Jerusalem,  and  there 
was  none  to  bury  them." 

185.  Loss  and  Help. — The  aggregate  loss  of  property 

1.  The  first  schoolmaster,  who  taught  the  Free  State  and  Pro-slavery 
parents'  children  alike,  and  never  spoke  of  politics  in  his  school,  Edward 
Fitch,  was  wantonly  murdered  in  his  home  and  his  house  set  on  fire. 
The  wife  succeeded  in  dragging  the  body  from  the  flames.  They  cursed 
her,  and  threw  it  back  and  it  was  consumed.  One  of  them  discovered 
her  looking  at  her  husband's  photograph,  with  her  three  children  around 
her.  He  grabbed  it  and  cast  it  into  the  fire.  Nobody  could  conceive  a 
cause  for  this  cruelty  till  the  mother  said  :  "My  little  child  had  gotten 
a  toy  American  flag,  and  had  climbed  upon  the  shed  and  placed  it  there." 


156 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


estimate   as 


Geu.  James   G.   Blunt. 


would  be  hard  to  reach.  ''As  careful  an 
could  be  made,"  say  the  early  and  late 
historians,  ''was  about  $1,500,000." 
To  the  stricken  city  and  its  people, 
Kansas,  though  war-scourged  and  poor, 
displayed  the  utmost  generosity,  and 
help  came  from  far  and  near. 

186.  Massacre  of  General  Blunt 's 
Staff. — On  October  6,  1863,  the  massa- 
cre of  General  Blunt 's  staff  near  Bax- 
ter Springs  occurred.  He  had  been  on 
business  in  Kansas  and  was  returning  with  a  small  cav- 
alry escort  to  Fort  Smith,  when  he  was  attacked  by 
Quantrill  with  600  guerrillas.  Eighty  of  his  party,  with 
several  civilians,  were  killed.  General  Blunt,  rallying 
some  fifteen  of  his  guard,  held  off  the  foe  and  escaped. 
The  guerrillas  attacked  a  small  post  near  by,  called  Fort 
Blair,  but  were  beaten  off  with  loss. 

PRICE  IS  RAID  IN  MISSOURI. 

187.  The  Confederate  Situation.— In  1864  the  Confed- 
erate situation  in  Louisiana,  the  Indian  Territory  and 
Arkansas  became  temporarily  improved.  The  Confed- 
erate armies  were  strengthened  in  arms,  clothing,  and 
even  artillery,  by  captures  made  in  the  campaigns  men- 
tioned. General  Sterling  Price  was  reported  to  have 
10,000  veteran  troops  in  a  good  state  of  equipment,  and 
his  ranks  were  nearly  doubled  in  numbers  by  a  severe 
conscription  in  Arkansas. 

188.  The  Union  Situation. — During  the  summer  of 
1864,  the  Union  forces  in  Arkansas  were  principally  con- 


STATE    CONSTKUCTION. 


157 


centrated  in  Little  Rock  and  Fort  Smith.  In  September, 
when  the  rumors  of  a  move  northward  on  the  part  of 
General  Price  began  to  thicken,  the  forces  available  for 
the  defense  of  western  Missouri  and  Kansas  were  scat- 
tered. General  Curtis  had  taken  the  field  against  the 
Indians,  and  was  operating  from  Fort  Kearney,  General 
Blunt  had  assumed  command  of  the  district  of  Upper 
Arkansas,  and  was  in  pursuit  of  the  Indians  beyond  Fort 
Larned. 

Major-General  Sykes,  U.  S.  A.,  was  in  command  at 
Lawrence  of  a  small  and  scattered  force  of  Kansas  troops 
which  was  charged  with  the  duty  of  keeping  up  communi- 
cations and  supplies  with  Forts  Gibson  and  Smith,  and 
the  forces  in  southeastern  Kansas. 


V 

MISSOURI 

{ 

(CTCHISON,/ 

\ 

V 

LtAVENWorf*-* 

^iP^?^-^ 

.-^ 

lOX             / 

\. 

CITY 

'Yv 

ST    LOXnSoJ 

^"-            1 

JEfTRSONClTY«^ 

^        ^ 

(1 

---^xs:^ 

Osceolp*     '^              ,. 

/ 

/    Roll* 

v^ 

O5O 

Pilot  l6>o|3                         Ax 

^,~.,j 

y 

\ 

K  AN  SAS 

^^rc^c'i 

K^ 

.NeWTONlA 

Springneld 

J 

Map     of     Price     Campaigu. 


158 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


189.  General  Price  Moves  Northward. — General  Price 
crossed  the  Arkansas  at  Dardanelle,  between  Little 
Eock  and  Fort  Smith.  His  army  was  divided  into  three 
divisions  commanded  by  Generals  Fagan,  Marmaduke, 
and  Shelby.  Among  the  generals  of  brigade  and  colonels 
were  nearly  all  the  surviving  officers  who  had  fought 
west  of  the  Mississippi  and  north  of  Louisiana  from  1861 
to  1864.  The  number  of  the  Confederates  at  the  crossing 
of  the  Arkansas  was  estimated  at  18,000  men. 

190.  Union  Supplies  Captured.— On  the  12th  of  Sep- 
tember the  escort  of  a  large  supply  train  consisting  of 
610  cavalry  and  infantry,  White  and  Indian,  commanded 
by  Major  Henry  Hopkins,  was  attacked  at  Cabin  Creek, 
Cherokee  Nation,  by  2,500  of  the  enemy  under  General 
Gano,  of  General  Price's  command,  and  the  train  cap- 
tured and  burned.    It  was  a  very  serious  loss. 

191.  Defense  of  St.  Louis. — In  the  meantime.  General 
Rosecrans,  commanding  at  St.  Louis,  seemed  uncertain  as 
to  the  strength  and  direction  of  the  enemy's  movement. 
But  there  was  no  longer  room  for  doubt  after  the  24th 

of  September,  and  General  Thomas 
Ewing  proceeded  to  Pilot  Knob, 
where  he  was  attacked,  on  the  27th 
of  September,  by  Price's  army.  Gen- 
eral Ewing  made  a  steady  defense, 
but  finally  blew  up  his-  magazine  at 
Pilot  Knob,  and  fell  back.  From  this 
time  Kansas  names  begin  to  figure  in 
the  history. 

General     Thos.      Ewing.  rpj^^   ^^^^   guard   of  the   little    COlumU 

was  placed  under  command  of  Major  "Williams,  of  the 


STATE    CONSTRUCTION.  159 

Tenth  Kansas.  The  pursuing  column  was  checked  from 
time  to  time,  and  at  last  General  Ewing  reached  Rolla, 
where  the  infantry  of  his  force  remained  in  garrison, 
and  the  cavalry  marched  with  General  McNeil  to  Jeffer- 
son City.  It  is  believed  that  General  Ewing's  resistance 
saved  St.  Louis. 

192.  Concentration  of  Forces. — On  the  2d  of  October 
General  Rosecrans  reported  to  General  Curtis  that  Price 
was  moving  westward,  and  the  concentration  of  Kansas 
militia  began  at  Olathe.  A  force  of  6,000  men  was  col- 
lected at  Jefferson  City,  of  which  4,000  were  cavalry, 
composing  the  Provisional  Cavalry  Division  under  Gen- 
eral Alfred  Pleasonton. 

193.  Call  for  Volunteers.— On  the  8th  of  October,  Gov- 
ernor Carney  issued  his  proclamation  calling  out  the 
"men  of  Kansas,"  and  announcing  Major-General  Deitz- 
ler  as  commander-in-chief. 

194.  The  Response. — The  response  of  the  "men  of 
Kansas"  was  immediate.  Says  Adjutant-General  HoUi- 
day  in  his  report:  "Never  was  appeal  for  help  answered 
so  promptly.  In  most  instances,  on  the  next  day,  or  the 
second,  after  the  receipt  of  the  proclamation  at  regimental 
headquarters,  the  regiment  itself  in  full  force  was  on  the 
march  for  the  rendezvous." 

The  whole  number  of  Kansas  militia  who  appeared  for 
active  service  exceeded  16,000  men.  Many  of  the  officers 
sC'rving  in  the  militia  had  seen  service  in  the  volunteers. 

195.  Battle  of  Lexington. — On  the  receipt  of  the  news 
that  Price  had  passed  Jefferson  City  and  occupied  Lex- 
ington, General  Blunt  relieved  General  Sykes  at  Olathe. 
General  Blunt  moved  to  Lexington  with  two  brigades  of 


160  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

cavalry.  Early  on  his  arrival  he  inspected  the  position 
with  his  aides,  General  James  H.  Lane  and  Lientenant- 
Colonel  Burris.  On  the  approach  of  Frieze's  advance  the 
fight  was  opened  by  a  portion  of  the  Fifteenth  Kansas 
under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hoyt.  As  his  troDps  fell  back 
before  the  overwhelming  mass  of  the  enemy,  the  move- 
ment was  covered  by  a  column  of  Kansas  regiments. 
When  this  column  was  flanked  by  the  enemy,  it  would 
fall  back  and  form  another  line,  thus  keeping  up  a  fight 
for  six  miles,  2,000  against  28,000.  In  the  darkness  the 
command  fell  back  toward  Independence,  bivouacking  a 
few  miles  from  the  Little  Blue.  At  sunrise.  Colonel  Moon- 
light was  left  to  defend  the  bridge  at  the  Little  Blue  while 
possible,  and  the  rest  of  the  division  fell  back  to  Inde- 
pendence. 

196.  Battle  of  the  Little  Blue. — In  the  morning  the 
battle  of  the  Little  Blue^  began.  Colonel  Moonlight  with 
600  men  was  on  the  grounds.  He  was  joined  by  Colorado 
regiments  and  the  Fourth,  Twelfth,  and  Nineteenth  Kan- 
sas Militia.  They  fought  valiantly  until  the  order  came, 
''Fire  the  bridge  and  fall  back."  They  obeyed,  fighting 
the  enemy  28,000  strong,  which  came  swarming  through 
the  shallow  water  as  they  retreated.  General  Blunt  came 
on  the  field  and  formed  a  new  line,  which  contained  no 
more  than  2,500  men.  Then  there  was  fighting,  eight 
hours  of  it  in  all,  and  our  little  army  fell  back  to  Inde- 
pendence. There  were  600  men  to  begin,  and  2,500  to 
close,  with  a  loss  of  about  200. 

197.  Battle  of  the  Big^  Blue. — The  entire  force  under 

2.  The  names  Little  Blue,  Bis;  Blue  and  Independence  must  not  be 
misapplied  to  Kansas  locations.     This  fighting  was  all  done  in  Missouri. 


STATE    CONSTRUCTION. 


161 


General  Curtis  rested  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Big  Blue, 
on  the  road  leading  from  Independence  to  Kansas  City. 
during  the  night  of  October  21,  1864.  The  transportation 
was  sent  back  to  Kansas  City,  where  as  at  Wyandotte, 
guns  were  fired  during  the  night  to  warn  the  militia. 
Before  all  who  camped  that  night 
along  the  winding  stream,  there  lay 
a  troubled  day. 

The  Big  Blue  may  be  crossed  only 
•at  fords,  and  the  battle  of  the  21st 
consisted  largely  of  the  attack  and 
defense  of  these  fords.  The  point  that 
became  most  famous  during  the  day 
was  Byron's  ford.     Here  the  enemy, 

after  a  heavy  fight,  succeeded  in  crOSS-^olonel  James   Montgomery. 

ing,  and  the  Union  forces  were  crowded  back  toward 
Westport,  but  in  turn  the  Confederates  were  themselves 
pressed  back.  At  sundown  the  Union  troops  retired  to 
AVestport. 

The  tragedy  of  the  day  was  the  overwhelming  of  the 
Second  Kansas  State  Militia  under  Colonel  Veale,  sup- 
porting a  single  gun  at  the  Macabee  farm.  The  des- 
perate fight  around  the  gun  resulted  in  a  loss  to  the  bat- 
talion of  thirty  killed,  fifty  wounded  and  102  captured. 
The  command  was  from  Shawnee  county. 

198.  Movements  Before  Westport. — At  four  o'clock 
on  Saturday  evening,  the  22d,  the  left  and  centre  of  the 
Union  army  fell  back  to  Kansas  City,  and  were  placed 
in  the  intrenehments  there.  General  Curtis  faced  the 
foe  with  his  volunteers  in  Westport  and  his  militia  in 


162 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


Kansas  City.     The  Confederate  line  ran  along  the  Blue 
from  Byron's  ford  to  beyond  Russell's  ford. 

General  Pleasonton,  from  Jefferson  City,  followed  after 
Price's  army,  and  attacking  the  enemy's  rear  division, 
occupied  Independence.  Three  brigades — Sanborn's, 
Brown's,  and  Winslow's — took  the  road  to  Byron's  Ford; 
McNeil  with  another  brigade  moved  to  Hickman's  Mill, 
and  10,000  infantry  under  Major-General  Smith  moved 
from  Lexington  to  Independence. 

199.  Battle  of  Westport.— At  five  o'clock  on  the  fate- 
ful Sunday  morning,  the  Kansas  State  Militia  moved  out 
of  the  intrenchments  with  the  Ninth  Wisconsin  Battery 
and  the  Kansas  Colored  Battery.  Soon  the  battle  was 
resumed.  There  were  charges  and  countercharges ;  in 
some  instances  hand-to-hand  combats ; 
fights  stubborn  behind  stone  walls, 
and  fights  rapid  to  carry  them,  the 
artillery  everywhere  firing  from  every 
point  of  vantage,  the  guns  sometimes 
in  danger  and  saved  by  a  rush,  and 
finally  a  general  movement  forward. 
Eighteen  brass  Parrott  guns  and  thir- 
teen howitzers  opened  at  once  on  the 
opposing  lines.  The  enemy  began  to  coionei  Thos.  Moonlight, 
waver  and  fall  back.  Cheer  upon  cheer  rose  from  the 
Union  lines.  The  militia  poured  into  the  field,  and  the 
open  prairie  was  reached  when  a  heavy  column  of  cav- 
alry emerged  from  the  timber,  and  Pleasonton 's  charge 
was  on. 

200.  Retreat  of  General  Price.— Price's  army,  fighting 
all  the  while,  began  its  retreat  southward,  followed  by 


STATE    CONSTEUCTION.  163 

10,000  Union  men,  while  Colonel  Moonlight,  with  another 
division,  marched  along  the  border,  interposing  as  far 
as  possible  between  the  enemy  and  the  State. ^ 

201.  Price  in  Kansas. — The  retreating  army,  however, 
crowded  into  Kansas,  entering  in  Linn  County.  The 
pursuit  became  closer.  There' were  combats  at  Trading 
Post  Ford  and  at  the  Mounds.  On  the  25th  of  October 
the  decisive  battle  of  Mine  Creek  was  fought  on  Kansas 
soil,  where  800  prisoners  and  nine  guns  were  captured, 
and  many  officers  of  high  rank,  including  Generals  Mar- 
maduke  and  Cabell,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Union  men. 

202.  Defeat  of  Price  at  Newtonia.— From  the  fields  of 
Mine  Creek  and  the  Little  Osage,  the  enemy  was  pressed 
with  such  vigor  as  to  force  it  to  abandon  the  intention  of 
attacking  Fort  Scott.  Price  w^as  followed  back  into  Mis- 
souri and  finally  defeated  at  Newtonia,  where  the  pris- 
oners of  the  Second  Kansas  Militia,  taken  at  the  Little 
Blue,  were  paroled  and  rejoined  their  friends.* 

203.  Farewell  of  General  Curtis. — From  the  head- 
quarters of  the  Army  of  the  Border,  Camp  Arkansas,  on 
the  8th  of  November,  1864,  General  Curtis  issued  his  con- 
gratulatory order,  saying:  "In  parting,  the  General  ten- 
ders, his  thanks  to  the  officers  and  soldiers  for  their 
generous  support  and  prompt  obedience  to  orders,  and  to 
his  staff  for  their  unceasing  efforts  to  share  the  toil  inci- 
dent to  the  campaign.     The  pursuit  of  Price  in  1864,  and 

3.  Many  of  the  Kansas  Patriots  who  gave  their  lives  for  the  saving 
of  the  nation  were  interred  in  the  city  cemetery  at  Topelsa.  A  stately 
monument  has  been  reared  to  mark  their  resting  place  by  their  comrade, 
G.   G.   Gage. 

4.  Teacher  should  take  a  United  States  map  and  point  out  the  places 
where  the  Kansas  troops  served. 


164  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

the  battles  of  Lexington,  Little  Blue,  Big  Blue,  Westport, 
Marais  des  Cygnes,  and  Newtonia,  will  be  borne  on  the 
banners  of  the  regiments  who  shared  in  them;  and  the 
States  of  Missouri,  Iowa,  Kansas,  Colorado,  Illinois,  In- 
diana, Wisconsin,  and  Arkansas,  may  glory  in  the  achieve- 
ment of  their  sons  in  this  short  but  eventful  campaign." 


Kansas  at  Chlckamauga. — Viniard's  Place. 

204.  Service  of  Kansas  Volunteers. — With  the  closing 
of  the  "Price  raid"  campaign,  ended,  generally,  the  fight- 
ing days  of  the  Kansas  regiments.  In  the  course  of  the 
four  years'  war,  these  commands  saw  service  over  a  wide 
area.  The  First  Kansas  took  part  in  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg,  and  served  in  Louisiana.  The  Seventh  Cavalry 
took  part  in  the  operations  about  Corinth,  Miss.,  in  west- 


STATE    CONSTEUCTION. 


165 


'Mother     Bicker  dyke.' 


em  Tennessee  and  northern  Mississippi.  The  Eighth  In- 
fantry fought  at  Perryville,  Ky., 
Chickamauga,  and  Mission  Ridge, 
marched  east  to  Atlanta,  and  back 
again  to  Nashville,  participated  in 
the  great  battle  of  December,  1864, 
and  saw  its  last  active  service  in 
Texas.  The  Tenth  Infantry  took 
•part  in  the  battle  of  Nashville,  the 
siege  of  Mobile,  and  the  assault  on 
Fort  Blakely,  and  was  mustered  out 
at  Montgomery,  Ala.  The  Eleventh 
Cavalry  carried  its  guidons  to  far  Wyoming,  1,000  miles 
from  Fort  Leavenworth.  The  First  Kansas  Battery  was 
ordered  to  Indiana  to  check  the  famous  "Morgan  raid." 
Subsequently  it  served  with  the  armies  of  Tennessee  and 
Mississippi.  The  detachment  from  the  Second  Kansas 
Cavalry,  known  as  Hollister's  and  Hopkins'  battery, 
served  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  and  Mississippi.  The 
other  commands  as  well  as  these  did  their  work  in  Kan- 
sas, Missouri,  Colorado,  Arkansas,  and  the  Indian  Ter- 
ritory. ° 

205.  Kansas  Officers  Commissioned. — The  following 
general  officers  from  Kansas  were  commissioned  by  Presi- 
dent Lincoln  during  the  war:  Major-General  James  G. 
Blunt,  Brigadier-Generals  Robert  B.  Mitchell,  Albert  L. 

5.  On  the  map  of  the  State  are  preserved,  in  the  names  of  counties, 
the  names  of  Kansas  soldiers — Mitchell,  Cloud,  Trego,  Norton,  Clark, 
Harper,  Rooks,  Rush,  Russell,  Stafford,  Cowley,  Graham,  Jewell,  Osborne, 
Ellis,  Gove,  Pratt,  Ness  and  Hodgeman.  Governors  Crawford  and  Harvey, 
whose  names  are  borne  by  counties,  were  officers  in  Kansas  regiments. 
Alfred  Gray  and  Dudley  Haskell  saw  service  with  Kansas  troops. 

Among  the  men  and  women  who  have  brought  honor  to  the  State  is 
Mary  A.   Bickerdyke,  better  known  as  "Mother"   Bickerdyke,  who  died   at 


166 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


Lee,    George   "W.   Deitzler,    Thomas   Ewing,   Jr.,   Powell 
Clayton. 

Colonel  Cloud  was  commissioned  as  Major-General  of 
the  State  Militia  by  Governor  Crawford. 

206.  Records  of  the  State. — The  record  of  the  two 
wars  in  which  Kaisas  was  so  early  in  her  history  engaged 
— the  warfare  forced  on  her  people  to 
make  the  State  free  and  the  war  for 
the  preservation  of  the  Union — has 
been  well  kept.  Through  the  exer- 
tions of  the  State  Historical  Society, 
which  has  known  through  nearly  all 
its  history  but  two  secretaries,  Judge 
Franklin  G.  Adams  and  George  W. 
Martin,  there  has  been  gathered  a 
great  store  of  public  reports,  private  r-rankiin  g.  Adams, 
letters,  journals  written  by  soldiers  by  the  camp-fire's 
light  or  amid  the  echoes  of  battle,  and  the  "bruised 
arms"  used  in  many  a  savage  fray.  In  these  collections 
is  illustrated  all  the  story  of  Kansas  from  the  earliest 
time.  Here  are  the  rude  implements  and  weapons  of 
the  Indians ;  the  stained  and  worn  manuscript  journals 
of  the  missionary,  who  strove  for  the  Indian's  welfare; 
the  maps  and  charts  of  the  early  explorers ;  the  account 
books  of  the  fur  traders ;  the  evidences  of  the  first  hard 
life  of  the  pioneers,  the  advanced  guard,  showing  in  out- 


Bunker  Hill,  Kansas,  November  8,  1901.  In  the  beginning  of  the  great 
rebellion  she  was  one  of  the  first  to  comprehend  that  "war  means  sick- 
ness." For  four  years,  first  without  orders,  and  later  under  commission, 
she  cared  for  thousands  of  the  brave  boys  in  blue.  After  the  war 
Mother  Bickerdyke  helped  to  settle  Kansas  with  ex-soldiers  of  the  Union 
Army  and  their  families.  The  Mother  Bickerdyke  Home  for  soldiers' 
widows  is  a  beautiful  monument  to  this  great  souled  woman. 


Missionary  Kidge. 


168  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

ward  and  visible  signs  the  road  followed  to  a  finished 
and  intense  civilization.^ 

207.  The  State's  Colors.— In  the  care  of  the  State  itself 
the  flags  of  the  Kansas  regiments  and  batteries  are  pre- 
served. The  battle  flags  of  the  Kansas  regiments  and 
batteries  were  formally  presented  to  Xjovernor  Crawford, 
at  a  soldiers'  celebration  held  at  Topeka  on  the  4th  of 
July,  1866,  and  have  since  remained  in  the  care  of  the 
State. 

INDUSTEIAL  AFFAIES. 

208.  The  Homestead  Law.— An  event  having  a  most 
important  bearing  on  the  life  and  prosperity  of  Kansas 
was  the  passage  of  the  Homestead  Law.  The  bill  had 
been  introduced  in  the  House  by  Mr.  Grow,  of  Pennsyl- 
vania. It  had  once  been  vetoed  by  President  Buchanan. 
It  was  signed  by  President  Lincoln,  and  took  effect  on 
the  1st  of  January,  1863.  Within  ten  years  thereafter 
twenty-six  millions  of  acres  of  the  public  lands  were 
entered  by  homestead  settlers. 

The  law,  in  substance,  gave  a  title  from  the  United 
States  to  the  actual  settler  who  held  the  160  acres  for  five 
years.    The  Homestead  Law  was  an  answer  to  those  who 

demanded  "land  for  the  landless,"  and  who  sang:  "Uncle 

\ 

6.  In  August,  1890,  Congress  made  lawful  the  purchase  of  7,600  acres 
of  land  in  Tennessee  and  Georgia  to  be  known  and  preserved  as  the 
Chickamauga  and  Chattanooga  National  Military  Park.  By  the  same  act 
it  was  made  lawful  for  "States  having  troops  engaged  in  the  battles  upon 
these  grounds  to  suitably  mark  their  location  by  tablets  or  monuments. 
The  Legislature  of  1895  gave  power  to  (iovernor  Morrill  to  appoint  a 
commission  of  Kansas  soldiers  to  control  the  placing  of  monuments  to 
the  memory  of  the  Kansas  boys  in  blue  who  fought  in  these  memorable 
battle  fields.  As  a  result  of  the  work  of  this  commission  three  beautiful 
memorials  were  erected.  They  were  unveiled  on  the  20th  of  September. 
1895.  One  is  a  monument  on  Mission  Ridge  at  Chattanooga,  one  a 
granite  boulder  tablet  on  Orchard  Knob,  and  the  third  a  monument  at 
Viniard's  I'lace,   Chickamauga. 


STATE    CONSTEUCTION.  169 

Sam  is  rich  enough  to  give  us  all  a  farm."  At  the  close 
of  the  Civil  War  the  law  was  so  amended  that  the  home- 
steader might  deduct  from  the  five  years'  residence  re- 
quired by  the  law,  the  time  passed  by  him  in  the  military 
or  naval  service  of  his  country.  With  the  close  of  the 
war,  a  great  ex-soldier  immigration  poured  into  Kansas. 

209.  Grant  to  A.  T.  &  S.  F.  Railroad.— The  policy  of 
subsidizing  the  railroads  in  lands  and  bonds  by  the  gen- 
eral Government  was  diligently  labored  for  by  Kansas 
men  at  Washington.  In  1863,  Congress  made  to  the 
State  of  Kansas  a  grant  of  .land,  giving  alternate  sections, 
for  ten  miles  in  width,  amounting  to  6,400  acres  per  mile, 
on  either  s\de  of  a  proposed  line  running  from  Atchison 
via  Topeka  to  some  point  on  the  southern  or  western 
boundary  of  the  State  in  the  direction  of  Santa  Fe,  with 
a  branch  from  some  point  on  the  southern  line  of  Kansas 
to  the  City  of  Mexico.  This  grant,  the  State  of  Kansas 
transferred  to  the  Atchison,  Topeka  &  Santa  Fe  Railroad 
Company,  February,  1864.  It  amounted  to  some  3,000,000 
acres  of  land. 

210.  Grant  to  the  Union  Pacific  Railroad.— The  East- 
ern Division  of  the  Union  Pacifi'C,  on  which  work  was 
begun  on  the  State  line  of  Kansas  and  IMissouri  in  No- 
vember, 1863,  eventually  received  a  grant  of  alternate 
sections,  twenty  miles  in  width,  and  amounting  to  12,800 
acres  to  the  mile.  The  grant  extended  394  miles  west 
from  the  Missouri  River,  and  amounted  to  some  6,000,000 
acres.  Other  lines  extending  through  Kansas  received 
subsidies,  but  these  two,  the  Atchison,  Topeka  &  Santa 


170  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

Fe  and  the  Union  Pacific  Eastern  Division,  later  called 
the  Kansas  Pacific,  and  the  Missouri,  Kansas  and  Texas, 
were  the  largest  grantees  of  land.  Besides  these  grants 
the  railroads  acquired  large  tracts  of  Indian  lands. 

211.  Results. — The  organized  counties  voted  large 
amounts  of  bonds  to  the  roads,  and  the  progress  of  the 
roads  for  a  time  wsls  the  progress  of  the  State.  The 
grants  of  land  facilitated  the  building  of  the  roads,  and 
in  Kansas  the  railroads  preceded  instead  of  following  the 
settlement,  greatly  accelerating  the  old  process  of  filling 
a  country  with  a  wagon  immigration.  The  land  grant 
companies  sold  their  lands  at  low  rates,  and  on  long 
time,  and  the  alternate  sections  reserved  by  the  Govern- 
ment were  sold  at  $2.50  an  acre,  while  beyond  the  "rail- 
road limit,"  the  homesteader  pushed  in  everywhere. 

The  United  States  land  offices  which,  in  the  territorial 
days,  were  located  along  the  line  of  the  Missouri  river, 
were  moved  westward  from  time  to  time  to  accommo- 
date the  host  of  claim  seekers,  who,  in  some  instances, 
remained  about  the  offices  the  entire  night  to  await  their 
opening  in  the  morning. 

212.  Election  of  1864.— On  November  8,  1864,  the  gen- 
eral election  in  Kansas  resulted  in  the  choice  of  Samuel 
J.  Crawford,  Kepublican,  for  Governor.  The  Democratic 
Party  had  no  ticket  in  the  field.  Solon  O.  Thacher  was 
the  candidate  on  the  Republican  Union  ticket.  Abraham 
Lincoln  received  the  first  vote  of  Kansas  for  President 
of  the  United  States. 

Eeview  Ouestions. — Why  are  the  enactments  of  the  Tiegislatures 
of   '63  and    '64  memorable? — Tell  of  Quantrill's  raid. — .Describe  the 


STATE    CONSTEUCTION. 


171 


Union  and  Confederate  situation  of  1864. — Give  the  Price  campaign 
through  Missouri. — What  battles  were  fought  in  Kansas? — Where  was 
the  final  defeat  of  Price's  army? — Name  the  most  noted  battles  of 
the  Civil  War  in  which  Kansas  soldiers  took  part. — Where  are  the 
records  and  colors  of  the  State  kept? — Describe  the  records. — When 
you  go  to  Topeka,  look  for  the  colors  in  the  historical  rooms. — What 
was  the  Homestead  Law? — Tell  of  the  grants  niade  to  the  Santa  Fe 
and  to  the  Union  Pacific  Eailroads. — What  were  the  results  of  the 
grants? 


Stone  Dugout,   Osborne,  Kansas. 


CHAPTER    XIX. 


213. 


GOVEENOR  CRAWFOED'S  ADMINISTRATION. 
1865—1869. 

The  Legislature  of  1865. — James  H.  Lane  was  re- 


Guveiiioi   Samuel  J. 
Crawford. 


elected  United  States  Senator  by  the  Legislature  of  1865. 

214.  The  Soldiers'  Home-Coming. — At  the  close  of 
the  war  the  troops  came  marching 
home  from  far  and  near.  On  April 
8,  1865,  a  great  jubilee  was  held  at 
Leavenworth,  celebrating  the  Union 
victories  and  the  close  of  the  war. 

215.  The  Homesteader.  —  The 
homesteader  has  been  styled  the  "Pil- 
grim Father"  of  Kansas.  He  left  the 
great  highways  of  travel  and  sought 
the  vast,  open  country.  From  the 
thin  line  of  timber  skirting  the  stream,  he  might  gather 
a  few  logs  to  build  his  cabin,  but  more  often  he  shaped 
his  habitation  in  or  of  the  earth  itself,  a  dugout  or  a 
sodhouse,  the  walls  built  up  of  strips  of  prairie  sod  turned 
over  by  the  plow,  the  roof  covered  with  marl,  or  natural 
lime,  as  it  was  called,  from  the  bottom  of  the  prairie  draw. 
Here,  with  his  wife  and  children,  lived  in  the  first  hard 
years  the  homesteader,  under  the  vast  sky,  girt  about 
by  an  immense  and  remote  horizon. 

They  were  often  miles  from  any  house,  theirs,  as  far 

172 


STATE    CONSTEUCTION. 


173 


as  eye  could  see,  the  only  habitation.  The  stillness  of 
the  prairie  was  broken  only  by  the  swish  of  the  prairie 
grass,  with  now  and  then  the  trill  of  the  meadow  lark, 
the  croon  of  the  prairie  chicken,  or  the  call  of  the  wild 
water  fowl  in  its  flight  across  the  boundless  expanse  of 
sky. 


Sod  Schoolhouse,  Osborne  Coanty,  Kansas. 

At  first  the  buffalo^  in  their  migrations  passed  in  vast 
herds,  a<nd  the  stragglers  wandered  near  the  settler's 
door;  or  the  blanket  Indian  came  to  barter  or  to  beg, 
stopping  in  front  of  the  prairie  cabin  and  summoning 
the  inmates  with  the  single  salutation,  ''How." 

1.  When  there  was  nothing  left  of  the  buffalo  save  their  bleaching 
bones,  the  settler  gathered  these  up  and  hauled  them  to  the  distant 
railroad  station,  where  they  accumulated  in  great  white  piles.  Thus  he 
added  to  his  slender  store  of  ready  money.  From  Hays  City,  in  May, 
1875,  the  shipments  of  bones  amounted  to  twenty  tons  a  day.  They  were 
shipped  east  for  fertilizing  and  other  purposes. 


174  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

The  toil  of  the  early  years  yielded  small  return ;  often 
the  brown  face  of  the  settler  searched  the  sky  in  vain 
for  a  sign  of  rain  to  freshen  the  ground  for  the  fainting 
corn;  and  in  the  autumn,  after  the  scorching  sun  had 
turned  the  prairies  to  bronze,  the  prairie  fire  swept  in 
lurid  flame,  and  the  settler  and  the  mother  of  his  children 


Buffalo. 

went  out  to  "back  fire"  that  they  might  save  the  home 
and  few  belongings  from  the  ruthless  destroyer. 

To  secure  supplies  and  obtain  news  of  the  world  be- 
yond, the  settler  would  take  his  team  and  go  to  the 
trading  post  miles  away,  to  be  gone  for  days,  while  the 
mother  cared  for  her  children  alone  but  unafraid  in  the 
prairie  vastness. 

Thus,  in  sun  and  shower,  in  drought  and  storm  lived 


STATE    CONSTEUCTION.  175 

the"  early  pioneer  and  began  the  development  of  that 
civilization  of  which  Kansas  has  a  right  to  be  proud. 
'^  216.  The  Indian. — While  the  Kansas  frontiersman  was 
thus  holding  the  picket  line  of  civilization,  he  was  exposed 
for  years  to  the  incursions  of  a  ruthless  enemy,  who  came 
and  went  with  the  uncertainty  of  the  wind — the  Indian. 
The  Civil  "War  had  not  ended  before  the  State  was  en- 
dangered by  the  incursions  of  the  savages.  The  Indians, 
in  1864,  had  become  so  formidable  that  Generals  Curtis 
and  Blunt  had  planned  a  campaign  against  them,  but  were 
recalled  from  it  to  meet  the  advancing  Confederates  of 
General  Price. 

217.  Indian  Raids.— In  1865  and  1866  the  Indians 
came  along  the  northwestern  valleys  and  murdered  set- 
tlers on  White  Rock  Creek  in  Republic  County  and  at 
Lake  Sibley  in  Cloud  County,  in  the  northern  part  of 
the  state.  These  outrages  were  followed  by  an  Indian 
raid  in  the  Solomon  valley.  The  building  of  the  Union 
Pacific  through  Kansas,  in  1867,  excited  the  savages.  The 
entire  plains  country  seemed  full  of  their  war  parties. 
They  attacked  settlers  in  the  Republican,  Smoky  Hill, 
and  Solomon  valleys,  and  raided  in  Marion,  Butler,  and 
Greenwood  counties.  In  June  of  1867,  the  Cheyennes, 
Arapahoes,  and  Kiowas  united  to  drive  back  the  frontier 
line  of  settlement  and  to  close  communications  across  the 
plains. 

Lieutenant-General  Sherman  called  on  Governor  Craw- 
ford for  a  battalion  of  volunteer  cavalry,  and  in  obedi- 
ence to  the  Governor's  proclamation,  the  Eighteenth  Kan- 
sas Battalion  of  358  men,  commanded  by  Colonel  H.  L. 
Moore,  took  the  field.     Colonel  Moore  met  and  defeated 


176  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

the  Indians  and  drove  them  toward  the  headwaters  of 
the  Republican.  While  the  Cheyennes,  Arapahoes,  Kio- 
was,  Sioux,  and  Comanches  were  operating  in  the  north- 
west, bands  of  Osages,  Wichitas  and  others  were  raiding 
in  the  southern  and  western  portions  of  the  State,  neces- 
sitating the  stationing  of  troops  at  Fort  Larned  and  other 
points. 

218.  The  Treaty  of  1867.— On  the  28th  of  October, 
1867,  Generals  Sherman  and  Sanborn,  and  Commissioner- 
of-Indian-affairs  Taylor  made  a  treaty  with  the  Chey- 
ennes  and  Arapahoes  at  Medicine  Lodge  Creek,  which 
provided  that  these  Indians  should  remove  to  a  reserva- 
tion in  the  Indian  Territory.  As  a  conciliatory  measure 
the  Indians  were  given  the  privilege  of  hunting  in  Kansas 
and  were  furnished  with  arms  by  the  government.  The 
measure  proved  very  disastrous  to  the  settlers. 

219.  The  Treaty  Broken. — As  soon  as  they  were  ready 
in  the  spring,  the  Indians  broke  the  treaty,  a  body  of 
500  Cheyennes  penetrating  the  State  nearly  to  Council 
Grove,  Morris  county,  murdering  and  robbing  as  they 
went.  At  the  very  time,  in  August,  when  the  Indians 
were  drawing  arms  at  Fort  Larned,  a  party  of  Cheyennes 
was  murdering  men,  women  and  children  in  Ottawa, 
Mitchell  and  Republic  counties. 

220.  Governor  Crawford  to  the  Rescue. — On  hearing 
of  the  raid,  Governor  Crawford  went  by  special  train  to 
Salina,  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  a  company  of  volun- 
teers, and  followed  the  trail  of  the  Indians.  It  was  found 
that  forty  persons  had  been  killed,  numberless  outrages 
committed,  and  that  for  sixty  miles  the  settlements  had 
been  destroyed  and  the  country  laid  waste.    On  his  return 


STATE    CONSTRUCTION.  177 

to  Topeka,  he  sent  a  dispatch  to  the  President:  "The 
savage  devils  have  become  intolerable,  and  must  and  shall 
be  driven  out  of  the  State."  He  offered  to  furnish  all 
the  volunteers  necessary  to  insure  a  permanent  and  last- 
ing peace.  In  reply,  General  Sheridan,  at  Fort  Harker, 
gave  assurances  that  the  line  of  settlement  should  be  pro- 
tected and  garrisoned  with  infantry,  while  a  regular  cav- 
alry force  should  scout  the  exposed  country.  Governor 
Crawford,  however,  called  for  a  force  of  five  companies 
of  cavalry  from  the  militia  of  the  State,  each  man  to 
furnish  arms  and  accoutrements,  and  be  furnished  with 
rations  by  General  Sheridan.  The  companies  were  sta- 
tioned at  exposed  points  from  the  Nebraska  line  to 
Wichita,  relieving  a  regular  force  to  operate  against  the 
Indians.  General  Sully  went  south  of  the  Arkansas  with 
nine  companies  of  cavalry,  and  taught  the  Cheyennes  and 
Arapahoes  some  useful  lessons. 

221.  Governor  Crawford  and  the  Nineteenth. — Con- 
vinced tliat  the  Kiowas  and  Comanches  were  determined 
to  keep  up  the  fight.  General  Sherman  called  on  the  Gov- 
ernor for  a  full  regiment  of  volunteer  cavalry.  Governor 
Crawford  issued  his  proclamation  on  the  10th  of  October, 
1868,  and  on  the  20th  of  October,  ten  days  later,  the  regi- 
ment of  1,200  men  was  mustered  into  the  service  at  To- 
peka. -  The  regiment  was  called  the  Nineteenth  Kansas 
Volunteer  Cavalry.  Gallant  Governor  Crawford  resigned 
the  governorship  of  the  state  on  November  4,  1868,  to 
assume  the  command  of  the  Nineteenth. 

The  regiment  left  Topeka  on  the  5th  of  November,  and 
on  the  28th  joined  General  Sheridan  on  the  North  Cana- 
dian, but  at  one  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  27th  of 


178  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

November,  General  Custer  had  charged  into  Black 
Kettle's  village  on  the  Washita,  killed  103  warriors,  and 
captured  fifty-one  lodges  and  many  horses  and  mules. 
The  Indians  fell  back,  and,  on  the  24th  of  December,  sur- 
rendered. The  Nineteenth  moved  to  Fort  Hays  in  March, 
having  kept  the  open  field  all  through  the  severe  v^inter, 
and  in  April  was  mustered  out.  This  was  the  last  call  on 
Kansas  for  so  large  a  force  as  a  regiment  to  repel  or 
pursue  Indians. 

222.  Battle  of  Beecher  Island  on  the  Arickaree. — The 
Indian  wars  on  the  plains  terminated  with  the  Battle  of 
Beecher  Island,  September,  1868.  Scouts  reported  to 
General  Sherman  that  a  small  band  of  Indians  not  to 
exceed  200  in  number  were  entering  northwestern  Kan- 
sas. General  Sherman  selected  fifty  experienced  Indian 
fighters  and  placed  Colonel  Forsythe  of  his  own  staff  in 
command.  On  September  10  the  troops  left  Ft.  Wallace. 
At  Ft.  Sheridan  they  struck  the  trail  of  the  Indians,  and 
following  it  soon  came  to  a  deserted  Indian  village,  where 
at  least  600  lodges  had  stood.  This  discovery  did  not 
dishearten  the  brave  fifty;  they  pressed  qn  fearlessly. 
The  camp  for  the  night  was  made  opposite  a  sandy  island 
on  the  north  bank  of  the  Arickaree,^  which  at  that  season 
of  the  year  contained  no  water.  Just  as  day  began  to 
dawn  the  Indian  alarm  was  given.  In  an  instant  Colonel 
Forsythe 's  command  was  in  battle  form.  The  valley  re- 
sounded with  the  yells  of  a  thousand  savages.  Stripped 
of  their  blankets  and  hideously  painted,  they  rode  down 
the  hills  like  demons.     The  chiefs,  conspicuous  in  their 

2.  The  Arickaree  monument  is  in  Colorado,  five  or  six  miles  west  of 
the  Kansas  line,  in  Yuma  County.  Kansas  paid  for  half  of  the  monu- 
ment, because  all  the  men  engaged  were  Kansas  settlers.  Colorado  paid 
the  balance. 


STATE    CONSTRUCTION.  179 

war  bonnets,  led  the  tumultuous  onslaught.  Colonel  For- 
sythe  gave  the  order,  "Reach  the  island  and  hitch  the 
horses."  They  were  none  too  soon,  for  the  savages  were 
upon  them.  Fire !  Fire !  rang  out  along  the  line  as  the 
men  dropped  behind  the  sand  ridges.  The  answering  roar 
of  the  muskets  drowned  the  savage  yell ;  painted  warriors 
reeled  and  fell  from  the  plunging  ponies;  still  the  Indians 
came  on  in  savage  fury.  Volley  after  volley  smote  them; 
the  dead  and  dying  strewed  the  sand.  Suddenly,  like 
the  sweep  of  a  tempest,  the  savages  turned  and  fled, 
leaning  from  their  ponies  to  gather  up  their  fallen  as 
they  rode  away. 

The  Indians,  led  by  the  noted  chief  Roman  Nose,  made 
another  attack  at  11  o'clock,  this  time  on  the  east  end 
of  the  island.  Jack  Stilwell,  a  youth  of  eighteen,  and  five 
men  were  stationed  there.  So  sure  was  the  aim  of  the 
brave  fellows  that  Roman  Nose,  who  was  thought  to  have 
a  charmed  life,  fell  at  the  first  volley.  Again  the  sayages 
turned  back.  A  third  attack  was  led  by  Dull  Knife,  a 
celebrated  old  warrior.  He  too  fell,  and  his  braves  fled 
before  the  skilled  marksmanship  of  the  scouts. 

This  ended  the  battle ;  the  Indians  however  kept  the 
hills.  More  than  half  of  the  scouts  in  the  sand  pits  were 
either  wounded  or  killed.  There  was  no  food  but  horse 
flesh ;  water  was  obtained  by  digging  in  the  sand.  Colonel 
Forsythe  was  severely  wounded  and  unable  to  rise.  It 
was  decided  that  an  effort  should  be  made  to  inform 
Fort  Wallace,  ninety  miles  away,  and  Jack  Stilwell  and 
James  Trudeau^  Volunteered  to  go.    They  were  given  per- 

.3.  The  third  ni^ht  nfter  Stillwell  and  Trudenn  left  the  island,  two 
others,  Donovan  and  Pliley,  started  for  the  fort.  They  came  upon 
Colonel  Carpenter's  command,  on  the  south  fork  of  the  Republican.     The 


180 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


mission,  and  started  at  midnight.  The  first  day  they 
hid  beneath  a  bank  but  three  miles  from  the  battle-field, 
the  second  day  a  swamp  protected  them,  and  the  third 
day,  seeing  Indians  in  an  open  plain,  they  concealed  them- 
selves in  the  carcass  of  a  buffalo.  At  last  they  reached 
Fort  Wallace  and  immediately  troops  were  hurried  to  the 


" 

^81 

BRMBgy.^,. 

- 

^^^P 

P^I^H^^^^f^'           ^ 

*SlM^ 

, 

"^^ 

^b^S^Baa^^g^^     i 

-«jli^t 

>^        -       J 

^tTg 

rOeJ'wEjJ^S^^^^^^^ 

R'^"'^^'^^- 

"« 

^^nH^^^" 

R';^.'-n 

W^^^^^P' 

'^tf 

^^P»^^ 

^^^^'  ■^':''^- 

mS^^^m^> 

^-^ 

^^^^ 

m0 

^^te' 

m: 

'  h    ' 

"    '' 

M^m^^'  ■ 

mHB^h^^^^  .' J^^' 

; 

^^^ 

..m^^ 

~MM 

^^mmmm 

^HHIr^^^^''^'  ~  "-^^SIhII 

Ifi 

mk      ..: 

Monument  Commemorating  Battle  of    Beecher's  Island. 

rescue.  Nine  days  after  the  morning  of  the  first  battle, 
relief  came  to  the  beleagured  men  on  the  Arickaree.  '^In 
recent  years  it  has  been  ascertained  through  Indians  who 
were  engaged  in  the  battle  that  they  lost  between  seven 
and  eight  hundred  braves." 

223.     Forts. — During  the  Indian  troubles  three  impor- 

comraand  rode  to  the  rescue  in  a  twenty-mile  dash,  and  reached  the 
Island  twenty-six  hours  in  advance  of  the  Fort  Wallace  party.  Lieutenant 
Fred  Beecher,  a  nephew  of  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  was  killed  here. 


STATE    CONSTEUCTION. 


181 


tant  forts  were  built  in  the  West.  Fort  Larned  was  estab- 
lished in  1859  in  Pawnee  County.  It  was  then  known  as 
the  camp  on  the  Pawnee  Fork.  The  name  was  changed 
to  Camp  Alert  in  February,  1860,  and  to  Fort  Larned  in 
June  of  the  same  year.  Fort  Dodge  was  on  the  Santa  Fe 
Trail,  and  had  been  a  famous  camping  place  for  years. 
In  1864  Colonel  Ford,  of  the  Second  Colorado  Cavalry, 
located  the  fort.  At  first  the  buildings  were  of  adobe. 
In  186^  permanent  structures  were  raised.  Fort  Hayes 
in  Ellis  County  was  located  in  1867,  near  Big  Creek,  a 
branch  of  the  Smoky  Hill  River.  Other  forts  were  Fort 
Wallace  in  Wallace  County  and  Fort  Ellsworth  in  Ells- 
worth County. 

224.  Death  of  Senator  James  H.  Lane. — Senator  James 
H.  Lane*  committed  suicide  in  July,  1866.  Governor 
Crawford  appointed  Honorable  Ed- 
mund G.  Ross  to  fill  the  unexpired 
term  in  the  United  States  Senate. 

225.  Election  of  United  States  Sen- 
ators.—The  Legislature  of  1867 
elected  S.  C.  Pomeroy  and  Edmund  G. 
Ross  United  States  Senators. 

226.  Election  of  1868.— On  the  res- 
ignation of  Governor  Crawford,  the 
official  duties  of  state  were  assumed 
by  Lieutenant-Governor  Green. 


>:^ 


Nehemlah   Green. 

In  November  James  M. 
Harvey  was  elected  Governor  on  the  Republican  ticket. 
The  nominee  of  the  Democratic  Party  was  George  W. 
Glick.  In  the  national  election  U.  S.  Grant  was  elected 
President  of  the  United  States. 


4.     See  biography. 


182  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS.  X 

Eeview  Questions. — When  and  for  what  purpose  was  the  jubilee 
held  at  Leavenworth? — Describe  the  life  of  the  homesteader. — What 
do  the  children  of  the  State  owe  to  the  pioneer? — What  were  the 
Indian  raids  of  1865-66?— Was  the  treaty  a  wdse  one?— Tell  of  Gov- 
ernor Crawford's  action  with  regard  to  the  Indian  raids. — Describe 
the  Battle  of  Beecher  Island. — Locate  the  principal  forts  built  on 
account  of  Indian  troubles. — What  prominent  politician  died  during 
this  administration? 


YEARS  OF  GREAT  IMMIGRATION. 
CHAPTER    XX. 

GOVERNOR  HARVEY'S  ADMINISTRATION. 
1869—1873. 

227.  The  State  House  and  the  Legislature. — The  State 
Government,  which  had  occupied  a  brick  building  on 
Kansas  Avenue,  erected  by  private  parties  in  1863,  and 
known  as  the  ''State  Row,"  aban- 
doned these  primitive  quarters  in  the 
later  days  of  1869  for  the  newly  com- 
pleted east  wing"  of  the  present  Capi- 
tol, upon  which  work  had  fairly  be- 
gun in  the  spring  of  1867.  The  first 
Legislature  to  meet  in  the  State's 
own  house  was  that  of  1870,  James 
M.  Harvey^  being  the  chief  magis- 
trate of  the  Commonwealth.  This««^^'"^'^'  J^^^*^^  ^^-  liaivey. 
Legislature  ratified  the  Fifteenth  Amendment  to  the  Con- 
stitution. 

228.  Indian  Troubles  of  1869-70.— The  still  implacable 
red  man  harried  the  borders  of  the  State  in  the  spring  of 
1869  and  1870,  coming  in  at  the  northwest.  A  battalion 
of  militia  was  sent  to  the  Republican,  Saline,  and  Solo- 
mon valleys,  and  TTnited  States  troops  were  employed  in 
the  same  region.  This  served  to  keep  the  Indians  within 
bounds. 


1.     Sec  biography. 


183 


184:  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

229.  The  Cattle  Trade  and  the  Cow-boy.— With  the 

building  of  the  railroads  the  great  Texas  cattle  trade 
became  a  feature  in  Kansas.  In  1866  Joseph  G.  McCoy 
came  to  Abilene  and  began  his  labors  to  attract  the  drive 
from  Texas  to  Kansas.  He  was  successful  and  from  1867- 
1872  Abilene  was  a  cow-boy  town.  The  cow-boy,  with  his 
jingling  spurs,  his  wide  hat,  his  six-shooter,  and  his  enor- 
mous leather  saddle,  soon  became  very  common  over  the 
state,  as  he  herded  the  long-horned  cattle  on  the  plains 
or  drove  them  to  the  most  convenient  shipping  place. 
Keady  to  meet  and  thrive  upon  this  sunburned  traveler 
from  Texas,  and  eager  to  share  the  burden  of  his  money 
and  his  sin,  came  a  motley  crowd  of  both  sexes,  and  great 
disorder  prevailed  by  night  and  by  day.  This  in  turn  led 
to  the  appointment  of  a  "regulator  of  the  peace,"  an 
officer  who  was  always  armed  with  several  revolvers  and 
possessed  an  unrivaled  facility  in  their  use.  Thus  Kansas 
became  the  home  of  Wild  Bill,  Buffalo  Bill,  Long  Jim, 
etc.,  who  for  years  held  a  place  in  the  dime  novel  liter- 
ature of  the  country.  In  1871  the  great  cattle  trade  tar- 
ried for  a  season  at  Newton.  By  the  close  of  Harvey's 
administration  the  trade  began  to  be  a  great  feature  at 
the  new  city  of  Wichita,  and  in  1875  at  Dodge  City.  At 
these  points  the  sale  and  shipment  of  cattle  rarely  fell 
under  200,000  head  a  year. 

230.  Census  of  1870.— The  United  States  census,  taken 
in  June  of  that  year,  showed  a  population  of  362,307.- 
The  increase  in  population  of  Kansas  from  1860  to  1870 
was  235.99  per  cent.    The  average  increase  for  all  of  the 

2.  In  1872,  it  was  discovered  that  Kansas  cast  a  larger  vote  than 
any  New  England  state,  except  Massachusetts. 


YEAES   OF    GREAT    IMMIGRATION.  185 

States  and  Territories  was  21.52  per  cent.^  Under  the 
census  of  1870,  the  State  became  entitled  to  three  Rep- 
resentatives in  Congress. 

231.  Railways  in  Kansas. — The  first  locomotive  for  the 
Atchison,  Topeka  &  Santa  Fe  Railroad  Company,  the  ''C. 
K.  Holliday,"  reached  Topeka  in  March,  1869.  On  the 
1st  of  September,  1870,  the  Kansas  Pacific,  originally 
called  the  Union  Pacific  Railway,  Eastern  Division,  and 
begun  at  the  Kansas  State  line  in  Wyandotte  in  1863, 
reached  Denver,  being  the  first  railroad  to  cross  Kansas 
from  east  to  west. 

232.  Kansas  Invitation. — With  the  construction  of 
these  railroads,  and  their  enormous  land  grants  to  be 
disposed  of,  ensued  several  years  of  such  bold  advertise- 
ment as  Kansas  had  never  before  received.  The  agents 
of  the  land  departments  of  the  great  railroad  companies 
visited  Great  Britain  and  the  Continent;  offices  for  the 
dissemination  of  information  were  opened  in  every  im- 
portant city  in  the  United  States  and  Europe.  The  buf- 
falo head,  the  especial  symbol  of  the  Kansas  Pacific,  ^ 
became  visible  in  the  most  distant  capitals ;  the  advan- 
tages of  the  Santa  Fe  and  its  lands  were  set  forth  in 
all  modern  languages.  All  distinguished  representatives 
of  foreign  nations  were  invited  to  join  excursions  through 
Kansas,  and  among  these  came  the  Grand  Duke  Alexis,* 
of  Russia,  and  his  suite,  who  were  welcomed  by  Governor 
Harvey  and  the  Legislature  at  Topeka.  The  members  of 
the  press  of  the  United  States  and  of  the  world  were 

3.  In  1878,  Kansas  stood  at  the  head  of  the  wheat  states  with  a  crop 
of  33,315,538  bus-hels. 

4.  See  Kansas  Historical  Collections,  Vol.  X,  for  an  interesting  ac- 
count of  the  entertainment  of  the  Russian  prince. 


186  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

cordially  invited,  and  Kansas  travelers,  in  remote  regions 
of  Europe,  often  found  local  communities  greatly  excited 
and  interested  over  the  advent  of  a  Kansas  newspaper, 
describing  the  lands  of  the  Great  West  ready  and  waiting 
for  the  settler. 

233.  Colonization. — A  favorite  method  of  disposing  of 
the  lands  was  in  large  tracts  to  "colonies."  In  1871  the 
Kansas  Pacific  sold  to  a  Swedish  colony,  in  Saline  county, 
22,000  acres ;  to  a  Scotch  colony,  in  Dickinson  county, 
47,000  acres ;  to  an  English  colony,  in  Clay  county,  32,000 
acres,  and  to  a  AVelsh  colony,  in  Riley  county,  19,000  acres. 
In  1873,  George  Grant,  of  England,  purchased  of  the  Kan- 
sas Pacific  Company  50,000  acres  in  the  eastern  portion  of 
Ellis  county,  with  the  design  of  colonizing  English  people 
of  means. 

234.  Labor  Party  and  the  Grange. — Two  significant 
developments  of  Governor  Harvey's  administration  were 
the  Labor  Party's  organization  and  the  Grange  Move- 
ment. The  Labor  Party  held  its  first  state  convention 
in  September,  1870.  Its  platform  advocated,  among  other 
ideas,'  the  natural  right  to  land,  the  referendum  of  legis- 
lative acts,  and  $2,000  exemption  from  taxation.  The 
first  Grange  was  organized  in  1872  and  was  a  co-opera- 
tion of  the  farmers  for  protection  and  development.  At 
one  time  there  were  30,000  members  of  the  Grange  in  the 
State. 

235.  Election  of  United  States  Senator. — Alexander 
Caldwell  was  chosen  United  States  Senator  by  the  Legis- 
lature of  1871. 

236.  Election  of  1872.— At  the  election  of  1872  Thomas 
A.  Osborn,  Republican,  was  chosen  Governor.     The  Lib- 


YEARS    OF    GEEAT    IMMIGRATION.  187 

eral  Republicans  nominated  Thaddeus  H.  Walker.  The 
Democratic  Party  made  no  nomination  for  Governor.  In 
the  national  election  U.  S.  Grant  was  elected  President 
of  the  United  States  for  a  second  term. 


Review  Questions. — What  was  the  first  legislature  to  meet  in 
the  State  House! — Tell  of  the  '^cattle  trade"  and  describe  the  cow- 
boy.— What  was  the  first  railroad  to  cross  Kansas? — Who  was  Grand 
IXike  Alexis,  and  why  did  he  come  to  Kansas? — What  colonies  settled 
in  Kansas  during  Harvey's  administration? — Name  two  important 
organizations  of  this  period. — Why  are  they  important? 


This  statuo  of  John  J.  Ingalls  is  in  the  Hall  of  Fame  in  the  capitol 
building  at  Washington.  It  is  the  work  of  Charles  Henry  Niehaus,  the 
most  famous  sculptor  in  the  United  States,  and  it  is  said  to  be  among 
the  best  of  the  works  of  art  at  the  capital  city. 


CHAPTER    XXI. 

\ 
GOVERNOE  OSBOEN'S  ADMINISTRATION. 

1873—1877. 

237.  The  Legislature  of  1873.— The  Legislature  of  1873 
chose  John  J.  Ingalls^  United  States  Senator  to  succeed 
Samuel  C.  Pomeroy.^ 

Senator  Caldwell  resigned  March  24,  1873,  and  Gov- 
ernor Osborn  appointed  Robert  Crozier  to  fill  the  vacancy. 

238.  State  Educational  Institutions. — The  State  Uni- 
versity, which  dedicated  its  .first  building  in  1866,  in  1873 
opened  its  main  building,  considered, 
at  the  time,  one  of  the  finest  struc- 
tures devoted  to  educational  uses  in 
the  United  States.  General  John 
Fraser  was  Chancellor  at  this  time. 
The  State  Normal  School  completed 
a  new  building  in  1872.  The  State 
Agricultural  College  removed  to  a 
point  nearer  Manhattan  in  1873.  The 
Insane  Asylum  at  Topeka  was  added^ovemor  Thomas  a.  osbom. 
to  the  State  institutions  in  1875. 

239.  The  Common  Schools.— In  1874  Kansas,  taking 
an  account  of  stock  in  resources  educational,  noted  that 

1.     See  biography.  2.     See  biography. 

189 


state  Normal  Buildings. 


YEAES    OF    GEEAT    IMMIGEATION.  191 

the  school  districts  had  grown  in  number,  since  1861, 
from  214  to  4,181 ;  the  school  population  from  4,901  to 
199,019.  The  number  of  teachers  employed  had  increased 
from  319  to  5,043.  This  increase  was  made  from  year  to 
year,  including  the  years  of  the  Civil  War,  no  year  being 
marked  by  a  falling  off  or  a  cessation  of  growth,  showing 
that  the  people  of  Kansas  were  not  to  be  diverted  by  any 
vicissitude  from  the  upbuilding  of  the  common  and  public 
school,  the  hope  and  security  of  free  government. 

EUEOPEAN  IMMIGEATION. 

240.  The  Mennonites.— With  the  addition  of  the  Atchi- 
son, Topeka  &  Santa  Fe  Railroad.  Company  to  the  land- 
selling  corporations,  came  vigorous  efforts  to  induce  emi- 
gration from  Europe.  Mr.  C.  B.  Schmidt,  on  behalf  of 
the  company,  traversed  the  Russian  empire,  carefully 
watched  by  the  emissaries  of  the  Government,  and  opened 
up  communication  with  the  Mennonite  communities  in 
Southern  Russia,  whose  thoughts  had  been  turned  toward 
emigration  to  America  by  the  proposed  revocation,  by 
the  Czar's  Government,  of  the  privileges  under  which 
their  fathers  had  settled  in  Russia. 

In  August,  1873,  five  leaders  of  these  people  (kindred 
in  race  and  religion  to  the  founders  of  Germantown  and 
other  early  German  settlements  in  Pennsylvania)  visited 
Kansas  to  select  lands  for  a  colony  from  Russia.  The 
Legislature  of  1874,  mindful  of  the  peaceful  principles  of 
the  colonists,  passed  an  act  exempting  Mennonites  and 
Friends  from  military  duty. 

241.  Mennonite  Settlement.— In  September,  1874, 1,600 


State  Agricultural  College  Buildings. 


YEAES   or    GREAT    IMMIGRATION.  193 

Mennonites  arrived  at  Topeka  from  Russia.  In  October 
the  Atchison,  Topeka  &  Santa  Fe  Company  sold  them 
100,000  acres  of  land  in  Harvey,  Marion,  and  Reno 
counties.  The  following  summer  they  were  living  in 
their  villages  of  Gnadenau  and  Hoffnungsthal,  in  Marion 
county,  and  located  on  their  farms  about. 

In  July,  1877,  it  was  estimated  that  6,000  Mennonites 
had  settled  in  the  Arkansas  valley.  Though  for  a  time 
popularly  called  "Russians,"  they  were  Germans  in  lan- 
guage and  lineage.  They  brought  with  them  from  Russia 
the  apricot  and  mulberry,  and  also  brought  what  they 
had  retained  in  Russia,  the  German  thrift,  industry,  and 
belief  in  popular  and  universal  education.  They  aban- 
doned, after  a  brief  trial,  the  village  and  "common  field" 
idea  under  which  they  lived  in  Russia,  and  absorbed  the 
American  idea  of  individual  ownership  and  control.  They 
have  taken  part  in  all  the  business  life  of  the  communities 
amid  which  they  came  to  dwell,  they  have  become  promi- 
nent in  it,  and  have  distinguished  themselves  by  their 
attachment  to  the  cause  of  education,  fostering  higher 
schools  of  their  own,  and  patronizing  the  State  Univer- 
sity and  other  educational  institutions  of  the  first  rank. 
The  Mennonite  immigration  continued  for  several  years, 
the  immigrants  coming  directly  to  Kansas  from  Russia 
and  Germany. 

242.  Russian  Immigration.— In  the  years  1875- '76- '77 
a  large  "Russian"  immigration  settled,  under  the  auspices 
of  the  Kansas  Pacific,  in  Ellis  county.  These  people, 
divided  into  five  settlements  named  after  cities  and  towns 
in  Russia,  adhered  to  some  extent  to  the  village  system, 


194  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

almost  universal  among  the  agricultural  population  of 
Russia,  and  to  the  Catholic  faith,  to  which-  they  have  tes- 
tified their  devotion  by  building  commodious  and  sub- 
stantial churches.  They  have  found  Kansas  a  land  of 
promise  and  fulfilment. 

THE  GRASSHOPPER  INVASION. 

243.  The  Disaster  of  1874. — There  is  no  rose  without 
its  thorn,  and  the  ten  wonderful  years  for  Kansas,  1870 
to  1880,  were  broken  by  one  year  of  calamity,  1874.  In 
that  year  the  drought  came  after  the  wheat  harvest  and 
the  grasshoppers  became  a  burden.  As  a  spectacle  the 
approach  of  the  winged  destroyers  was  sufficiently  ter- 
rifying. They  came  in  great  clouds  darkening  the  sky, 
and  settled  down  on  trees  and  growing  crops,  devouring 
leaf  and  branch.  The  destruction  of  vegetation  was  com- 
plete all  through  the  summer  and  fall. 

244.  Relief  Committee. — A  special  session  of  the  State 
Legislature  was  called,  but  concluded  that  relief  from 
the  State  treasury  was  impracticable,  and  that  the  locusts 
ijfiust  be  met  by  issues  of  county  bonds. 

In  this  juncture  a  State  Relief  Committee  was  organ- 
ized, composed  of  well-known  and  responsible  citizens  of 
the  State,  who  issued  an  address  to  the  citizens  of  Kansas 
and  the  people  of  the  Eastern  States.  This  committee 
received  and  disbursed  money  and  goods  to  the  amount 
of  $235,000.  This  was  the  last  grasshopper  invasion, 
and  probably  the  last  aid  campaign  in  or  for  Kansas. 
Owing  to  the  conduct  of  unauthorized,  irresponsible  and 


YEARS    OF    GREAT    IMMIGRATION.  195 

mercenary  parties,  against  whom  the  State  Committee 
raised  loud  but  ineffectual  warning,  the  word  "aid"  be- 
came quite  as  unpopular  in  Kansas  as  the  word  "locust." 

245.  The  Departure. — In  the  early  spring  of  1875,  the 
young  locusts  hatched  out  in  large  numbers  and  created 
much  alarm.  They  evinced,  however,  a  delicacy  of  con- 
stitution unknown  to  their  hardy,  northern  progenitors. 
Almost  as  suddenly  as  their  forebears  had  come  they  took 
wing  and  flew  to  the  northward,  in  time  to  allow  late 
planting,  and  the  season  which  followed  was  one  of  the 
most  fruitful  in  the  history  of  the  State. 

246.  The  Year  1876.— The  100th  Anniversary  of  the 
Declaration  of  Independence  was  marked  in  Kansas  by 
the  mildness  of  the  season  with  which  the  year  opened. 
The  ground  was  unfrozen,  and  bluebirds  were  singing 
in  January  and  February.  The  people  throughout  the 
State  evinced  a  revived  interest  in  the  history  of  their 
country  and  their  State.  The  Fourth  of  July,  1876,  was 
celebrated  with  enthusiasm,  and  seventy-five  newspapers 
published  local  histories. 

247.  Kansas  at  the  Centennial. — A  feature  of  the  ad- 
ministration was  the  participation  of  Kansas  in  the  Cen- 
tennial Exposition  of  1876  at  Philadelphia.  The  Legis- 
latures of  1875  and  1876  appropriated  $30,000  for  the 
exhibition.  A  building  was  erected  in  an  excellent  loca- 
tion. Dividing  the  space  with  the  State  of  Colorado,  the 
State  of  Kansas  made  a  memorable  exhibition  therein. 
Every  feature  of  the  exhibition  was  a  success.  A  most 
admired  map,  showing  by  a  star  the  location  of  every 


196  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

Kansas  schoolhouse,  is  still  preserved  in  the  Capitol  at 
Topeka.  Kansas  received  a  certificate  for  the  best  col- 
lective exhibit;  a  first  premium  on  fruit;  a  medal  for  a 
bound  record  book,  exhibited  by  the  State  Printer,  George 
W.  Martin,  and  a  prize  for  the  best  farm  wagon,  appro- 
priate to  the  State  whither,  by  freighter's  wagon  and 
farmer's  wagon,  the  ''Star  of  Empire"  has  taken  its 
westward  way. 

248.  The  Legislature  of  1874.— James  M.  Harvey,  who 

had  served  two  terms  as  Governor  of  the  State,  was 
elected  United  States  Senator  by  the  Legislature  of  1874, 
to  fill  the  remainder  of  the  term  for  which  Alexander 
Caldwell  was  elected,  a  portion  of  the  term  having  been 
filled  by  Hon.  Robert  Crozier,  by  appointment  of  the 
Governor. 

249.  Amendment  to  the  Constitution. — In  1876  the 
Constitution  of  the  State  was  amended  so  as  to  provide 
for  biennial  sessions  of  the  Legislature. 

250.  Election  of  1876. — In  this  year  there  was  a  revival 
of  political  parties  over  the  State.  The  Prohibition  Party 
held  its  first  state  convention  and  nominated  John  Paul- 
son for  governor.  The  National  Greenback-Labor  Party 
nominated  M.  E.  Hudson.  The  Democratic  Party  chose 
as  its  leader,  John  Martin,  and  the  Republican  Party, 
Geo.  T.  Anthony.  The  Republican  nominee  was  elected. 
In  the  national  election  Rutherford  B.  Hayes  was  elected 
President  of  the  United  States. 

Prudence  Crandall  was  imprisoned  In  1833  in  Canterbury,  Connecticut, 
for  attempting  to  teach  colored  girls.  She  moved  to  Kansas  in  1876. 
In  1886  she  was  given  a  pension  by  the  State  of  Connecticut. 


YEAES   OF    GEEAT    IMMIGEATION. 


197 


Eeview  Questions. — What  senator  was  elected  by  the  Legis- 
lature of  1873? — Give  an  account  of  the  development  of  the  State 
and  common  schools. — Who  were  the  Mennonites? — Where  did  they 
settle? — Describe  the  grasshopper  invasion. — What  was  its  date? — 
Tell  of  Kansas  at  the  Centennial. — What  amendment  was  made  to  the 
Constitution  in  the  Centennial  year? — What  new  party  appeared  in 
the  same  year? 


CHAPTER     XXIL 

GOVEENOR  ANTHONY'S  ADMINISTEATION. 

1877—1879. 

251.  The  Legislature  of  1877.— Preston  B.  Plumb^  was 
elected  United  States  Senator  by  this  Legislature.  In 
an  effort  to  improve  the  schools  of  the  State,  an  act  was 
passed  providing  for  a  uniform  sys- 
tem of  Teachers'  Institutes.  The  in- 
stitutes were  to  be  held  annually  in 
every  county  of  the  state  for  a  term 
of  four  weeks. 

252.  The  Temperance  Movement. 
— The  year  1877  is  noted  as  marking 
the  advance  of  a  great  temperance 
reform.  In  November  of  "that  year, 
the  Francis  Murphy^  Temperance 
Movement  began  organization  in  Topeka.  It  spread  to 
Lawrence  and  Leavenworth  and  finally  over  the  entire 
State,  until  thousands  of  persons  had  signed  the  pledge 
to  abstain  from  intoxicants.  On  March  9,  1878,  the  State 
Temperance  Society  was  organized,  with  John  A.  Ander- 


Governor     George 
Anthony. 


1.  See  biography. 

2.  Francis  Murphy  v/as  an  American  temperance  evangelist,  born  in 
Wexford,  Ireland.  He  served  in  the  Federal  drmy  during  our  Civil  War. 
Beginning  in  1870  at  Portland,  Maine,  he  started  temperance  reform  clubs 
throughout  that  State,  and  was  their  first  president.  His  headquarters 
were  in  Pittsburg,  Pennsylvania.  After  his  first  addresses  there  in  1876, 
4.5,000  people  signed  the  pledge,  a  number  that  was  soon  increased  to 
10,000,000  as  a  result  of  his  ministrations  in  different  parts  of  the  United 
States.  He  labored  also  in  England  and  acted  as  chaplain  in  the 
Spanish-American   War. — International   Encyclopedia. 

198 


YEARS   or    GREAT   IMMIGRATION.  199 

son^  as  president.  At  a  state  temperance  convention  held 
later  in  the  year  the  State  Temperance  Union  was  organ- 
ized, with  John  P.  St.  John  president.  On  August  30, 
1878,  the  temperance  people  of  the  nation  met  in  a  great 
National  Temperance  Camp-meeting  at  Bismarck  Grove, 
Lawrence.  Thousands  of  people  from  all  parts  of  the 
Union  assembled  there,  and  for  twelve  days  discussed 
ways  and  means  of  securing  the  disruption  of  the  liquor 
power. 

253.  The  Woman's  Christian    Temperance    Union.— 

The  Woman's  Christian  Temperance  Union  was  organ- 
ized at  Bismarck  Grove,  Lawrence,  in  1878.  Frances  Wil- 
lard  had  appointed  Miss  Amanda 
Way  to  act  as  leader  until  the  State 
could  be  organized.  Miss  Way  served 
as  chairman  of  the  meeting.  Mrs.  M. 
B.  Smith,  of  Topeka,  was  chosen 
president.  Mrs.  Smith  was  a  noble 
pioneer  in  the  work.  Here  and  there 
over  the  State  were  women's  tem- 
perance societies,  notably  the 
Woman's  Christian  Temperance  So-S^nator  Preston  b.  piumb. 
ciety  at  Winfield,  organized  by  Mrs.  Clotilda  Hilton  Greer. 
Mrs.  Smith  brought  these  societies  together  and  formed 
in  the  year  of  her  service  a  comparatively  strong  State 
Association.  The  motto  of  the  Woman's  Christian  Tem- 
perance Union,  "For  God.  Home,  and  Native  Land,"  is 
the  ideal  of  its  labors  and  a  prophecy  of  its  service. 

254.  Cheyennes  Start  for  Their  Old  Home.— In  the  fall 

3.     See  biography. 


200  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

of  1878,  a  band  of  northern  Cheyennes  who  had  been 
removed  to  the  Indian  Territory,  resolved  to  return  to 
their  former  home.  Taking  their  women  and  children, 
they  started  northward  through  Kansas.  When  the  news 
of  their  departure  reached  Fort  Dodge,  a  detachment  left 
the  Fort  and  attacked  them  at  the  canon  of  the  Famished 
Woman's  Fork.  Lieutenant-Colonel  William  H.  Lewis, 
commanding  the  troops,  was  killed,  and  the  Indians  pro- 
ceeded on  their  way.  As  the  Indians  crossed  several  main 
lines  of  railway  and  many  telegraph  lines,  information  of 
their  progress  was  constantly  forwarded.  The  State  Gov- 
ernment sent  arms  to  the  settlers  in  the  threatened  coun- 
try, but  nothing  in  the  way  of  assistance  could  be  secured 
from  General  Pope  at  Fort  Leavenworth.  On  the  30th 
of  September  the  Indians  appeared  on  the  Sappa,  in 
Decatur  County,  and  committed  fearful  atrocities,  then 
made  their  escape  almost  unmolested  to  the  North.  They 
were  finally  overpowered,  and  a  number  of  those  identi- 
fied as  having  committed  outrages  were  sent,  on  demand 
of  Governor  Anthony,  to  Kansas  for  trial  before  the  civil 
court  for  murder  and  other  crimes,  but  were  never  prose- 
cuted. This  raid,  in  which  forty  white  persons  were  re- 
ported killed,  was  the  last  in  Kansas.* 

255.  Minor  Events.— In  1877  the  first  telephone  in  the 
State  was  put  up  at  Manhattan.  In  1878  the  State  Normal 
School  building  at  Emporia  was  burned. 

A  strike   of  railroad  employees   at  Emporia  occurred 

4.  The  legislature  of  1909  passed  an  act  appropriating  to  the  board 
of  county  commissioners  of  Decatur  county  the  sum  of  .$]  .500  for  the 
purpose  of  erecting  a  monument  to  citizens  killed  in  said  county  in  a  raid 
of  Cheyenne  Indians  September  30,  1878.  This  was  the  last  raid  and 
the  last  scalping  within  the  borders  of  Kansas,  an  incident  in  our  history 
certainly  worth  marking. 


YEAES   OF    GEEAT    IMMIGEATION.  201 

which  brought  out  troops  by  the  Governor's  orders  to 
'1c[uell  the  disturbance. 

Two  noted  men  of  the  nation,  who  had  been  prominent 
in  the  effort  to  make  Kansas  free,  visited  the  State  during 
this  administration.  They  were  Eli  Thayer  and  Henry 
•Ward  Beecher.  Topeka  tendered  Mr.  Thayer,  as  the 
guest  of  the  State,  an  elaborate  banquet  and  reception. 
Mr.  Beecher  preached  in  Topeka  and  Lawrence. 

256.  Election  of  1878.— John  P.  St.  John  was  nomi- 
nated for  Governor  by  the  Republican  Party,  John  R. 
Goodin  by  the  Democratic  Party,  and  D.  P.  Mitchell  by 
the  Greenback  Party.    John  P.  St.  John  was  elected. 

Eeview  Questions. — What  senator  was  elected  by  the  Legis- 
lature of  1877? — Tell  of  the  inauguration  of  the  Temperance  Move- 
ment.— When  and  where  was  the  Woman 's  Christian  Temperance 
Union  organized? — What  is  the  society's  motto? — Eelate  the  story  of 
the  Cheyennes '  departure  from  the  Indian  Territory. — Name  four 
minor  events  of  this  administration. 


ECONOMIC  GROWTH. 

CHAPTER    XXIII. 

GOVERNOE  ST.  JOHN'S  ADMINISTRATION. 

1879—1883. 

257.  The  Legislature  of  1879.— The  Legislature  of  1879 
re-elected  John  James  Ingalls  United  States  Senator.  It 
provided  for  the  erection  of  a  State  Reform  School  at 
Topeka  and  for  the  building  of  the 
west  wing  of  the  State  House. 

258.  The  Prohibition  Movement.— 
In  his  message  to  the  Legislature  of 
1879  Governor  St.  John  made  the 
following  statement:  ''The  subject 
of  temperance  in  its  relation  to  the 
use  of  intoxicating  liquors  as  a  bev- 
erage has  occupied  the  attention  of 
the  people  of  Kansas  to  such  an  ex-^^'^^^'^o'"  J«i^°  ^f^f-  J^^°- 
tent  that  I  feel  it  my  duty  to  call  your  attention  to  some 
of  its  evils,  and  suggest,  if  possible,  a  remedy  therefor. 
Much  has  been  said  of  late  years  about  hard  times  and 
extravagant  and  useless  expenditures  of  money;  and  in 
this  connection,  I  desire  to  call  your  attention  to  the 
fact  that  here  in  Kansas,  where  our  people  are  at  least 
as  sober  and  temperate  as  are  found  in  any  of  the  states 
of  the  West,  the  money  spent  annually  for  intoxicating 
liquors  would  defray  the  entire  expenses  of  the  State 

202 


ECONOMIC  GROWTH.  203 

government,  including  the  care  and  maintenance  of  all 
its  charitable  institutions,  Agricultural  College,  Normal 
School,  State  University,  and  Penitentiary,  and  all  this 
expenditure  for  something  that,  instead  of  making  man- 
kind nobler,  purer  and  better,  has  only  left  its  dark  trail 
of  misery,  poverty,  and  crime.  Its  direct  effects,  as 
shown'  by  the  official  reports,  have  supplied  our  state 
prison  with  105  of  its  present  inmates." 

"Could  we  but  dry  up  this  one  great  evil  that  consumes 
annually  so  much  wealth,  and  destroys  the  physical, 
moral  and  mental  usefulness  of  its  victims,  we  should 
hardly  need  prisons,  poor  houses  or  police." 

259.  The  Prohibition  Amendment. — The  Legislature  of 
1879  voted  by  a  joint  resolution  to  submit  to  a  vote  of 
the  people  an  amendment  to  the  State  Constitution  for- 
ever prohibiting  in  Kansas  the  ''manufacture  and  sale 
of  intoxicating  liquors,"  except  for  medical  and  scientific 
purposes.  The  amendment  was  adopted  at  the  general 
election  in  November,  1880,  the  vote  standing  92,302  votes 
for  the  amendment  to  84,304  against  it.^ 

The  Legislature  of  1881  passed  the  act  to  enforce  the 
provisions  of  the  amendment,  called  the  Prohibitory  Law, 
the  final  vote  in  both  Houses  standing  132  ayes  to  thirty- 
one  nays. 2 

Kansas'  firm  stand  for  her  prohibitory  law  is  a  proof 
of  the  strength  of  character  of  her  citizens  and  a  con- 

1.  When  the  vote  was  counted,  it  was  found  that  Cowley  County  was 
the  banner  county  and  Winfield  the  banner  city.  Each  had  given  in  favor 
of  the  prohibitory  amendment  the  largest  number  of  votes  in  proportion 
to  the  population  of  any  county  or  city   in  the  state. 

2.  During  thirty  years  the  law  has  not  been  repealed  nor  has  the  Con- 
stitutional Amendment  upon  which  it  is  based  been  re-submitted  to  the 
people  for  their   aflfirmation   or   rejection. 


204  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

stant  illustration  in  practical  reform  to  the  states  of  the 
nation. 

260.  The  Election  of  1880.— In  the  State  election  of 
1880  Governor  St.  John  was  re-elected.  James  A.  Gar- 
field was  elected  President  of  the  United  States  in  the 
national  election. 

261.  The  Exodus. — In  the  spring  of  1874  it  was  noted 
that  parties  of  colored  people  were  emigrating  to  the 
State  from  the  South,  the  larger  number  from  Tennessee. 
These  immigrants  located  in  southeastern  Kansas,  and 
engaged  in  growing  cotton.  A  settlement  was  also  formed 
in  Morris  County. 

In  the  spring  of  1879  occurred  the  rush  from  the  South, 
to  which  was  given  the  name  of  the  ''Exodus,"  and  the 
''Exoduster"  for  a  time  became  a  prominent  figure  in 
Kansas.  Great  numbers  of  colored  people,  men,  women, 
and  children,  arrived  by  rail  at  Parsons,  from  Texas,  and 
on  steamboats  at  Wyandotte  and  Atchison.  The  later 
comers  represented  the  ex-slave  population  of  Tennessee, 
Mississippi,  and  Louisiana.  They  were  set  ashore  with 
their  scanty  household  goods,  strangers,  houseless,  food- 
less,  but  seemingly  cheerful  and  uncaring. 

Their  story  soon  became  the  talk  of  the  country,  a 
Congressional  committee  was  formed  to  investigate  the 
"Exodus,"  and  many  witnesses  were  summoned  from 
Kansas. 

In  the  meantime,  the  ''Exodusters"  eared  for  them- 
selves, and  were  cared  for.  A  Freedman's  State  Central 
Association  was  formed,  headed  by  Governor  St.  John. 


ECONOMIC  GROWTH.  205 

Money  and  goods  were  received,  $2,000  coming  from  Chi- 
cago and  $3,000  from  England. 

262.  Settlement  of  the  Negroes.-^In  the  late  fall  of 
1877,  *'*Exodusters"  gathered  from  Topeka  and  other 
points,  and  founded  the  town  of  Nicodemus,  in  Graham 
County.  "With  but  three  horses  in  the  entire  settlement, 
the  people  in  the  spring  put  in  wheat  and  other  crops, 
with  hoes  and  mattocks,  and  in  the  harvest  pulled  the 
grain  with  their  hands.  The  men  afterwards  walked  to 
eastern  Kansas  and  to  Colorado  in  search  of  work,  and 
the  women  "held  down  the  claims."  The  "Exodusters" 
formed  little  suburbs  in  the  cities  where  they  collected, 
and  "Tennesseetown,"  in  Topeka,  is  a  relic  of  the  ''Exo- 
dus." The  entire  body  was  absorbed  in  the  laboring 
population  of  the.  State.  These  immigrants  conducted 
probably  the  first  successful  attempt  of  the  freed  people 
to  occupy,  under  the  Homestead  Law,  the  public  lands 
of  the  United  States.  They  came  to  Kansas  moved  by  an 
impulse  to  seek  security  in  the  pursuit  of  life,  liberty 
and  happiness. 

263.  Kansas-Nebraska  Act  Anniversary. — In  1879,  at 
Bismarck  Grove.,  Lawrence,  the  quarter  centennial  of  the 
passage  of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Act  was  held.  The  day 
selected,  the  15th  of  September,  1879,  as  it  turned  out, 
was  the  twenty-fifth  anniversary  of  the  issue  of  the  first 
newspaper  in  Kansas.  The  meeting  was  marked  by  the 
number  of  men  and  women  present  who  took  part  in  the 
stirring  scenes  of  1854  to  1859.  Among  the  honored 
guests  and  speakers  from  abroad  was  Rev.  Edward 
Everett  Hale,  of  Boston,  whose  story  of  "A  Man  Without 


206  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

a  Country,"  had  taught  a  generation  of  young  Kansans 
patriotism,  and  who  had  himself  labored  with  voice  and 
pen  for  Kansas  in  the  old  territorial  days.  His  book, 
"Kansas  and  Nebraska,"  published  in  1854,  has  been  pro- 
nounced the  ablest  Kansas  book  of  its  time. 

264.  Constitutional  Convention  Reunion. — There  was 
a  reunion  at  Kansas  City,  Kansas,  July  29,  1882,  of  the 
surviving  members  of  the  Wyandotte  Constitutional  Con- 
vention. At  this  first  meeting  of  the  Constitutional  build- 
ers since  their  adjournment  in  1859,  it  was  discovered 
that  only  twenty-nine  were  living,  with  nineteen  still 
residents  of  Kansas,- and  of  these  ten  ;ivere  present.  The 
proceedings  were  of  the  highest  interest  and  a  permanent 
association  was  formed. 

265.  Kansas  Day.— With  the  growth  of  the  State,  it 
became  evident  that  the  feeling  of  state  pride  pervaded 
both  its  older  and  its  younger  population.  The  observ- 
ance of  the  29th  of  January  as  "Kansas  Day"  became, 
in  the  early  80 's  a  custom  in  the  schools  of  the  State,  In 
1882  the  observances  in  the  public  schools  of  Wichita  and 
Junction  City  were  matters  of  State  remark,  and  since 
that  time  the  "Kansas  Day"  celebration  has  become  well- 
nigh  universal.  On  "Kansas  Day"  elaborate  programs 
are  prepared,  essays  are  read  on  various  periods  in  the 
history  of  Kansas ;  Kansas  songs  are  sung,  Kansas  poems 
recited,  the  favorites  being  the  "songs  of  freedom,"  with 
which,  in  the  early  and  doubtful  days,  Whittier,  Lowell, 
Bryant  and  others  were  inspired.  Then  there  are  verses, 
ranging  from  grave  to  gay,  descriptive  of  the  Kansas 
earth,  and  sky,  and  life,  which  have  been  evoked  from 
Kansas  writers.     On  these  festive   occasions  the  school 


ECONOMIC  GROWTH. 


207 


rooms  are  decorated  with  the  national  colors ;  the  motto 
of  the  State  is  pronjiinent,  while  royally  radiant  the  sun- 
flower holds  its  place  as  the  State's  emblem. 


The  Kansas  Sunflower. — "Without  any  statutory 
provision  or  formal  adoption  as  the  "State  flower."  there 
came  about  through  the  "vox  populi"  the  selection  of 
the  sunflower  as  the  emblem  of  Kansas.  The  sunflower 
is  a  pioneer  in  the  State,  coming  with  the  first  breaking 
of  the   soil   by   the   passing  wheel   or   other   disturbing 


208  '  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

agency.  It  sprang  up  on  either  side  of  the  Santa  Fe 
trail  for  800  miles.  It  comes  wherever,  in  Kansas,  man 
comes  to  sow  or  reap,  marking  the  time  and  place,  and 
if  the  claim  is  abandoned,  it  grows  within  the  roofless 
walls  of  sod.  The  sunflower  is  the  badge  worn  by  Kan- 
sans  on  great  occasions  at  home  and  abroad.^ 

267.  The  Osage  Reservation. — In  1869  the  Osage  In- 
dians had  made  a  treaty  selling  their  lands  to  the  Leaven- 
' worth,  Lawrence,  and  Galveston  Railroad  Company,  to 
the  amount  of  8,000,000  acres. '^  The  settlers,  many  of 
whom  had  located  on  these  lands  prior  to  the  sale,  be- 
came fearful  lest  they  should  lose  their  homes.  Great 
meetings  were  held  at  Osage  Mission,  Parsons  and  other 
points  and  the  question  was  agitated.  On  the  19th  of 
January,  1874,  the  Attorney-General  of  the  United  States 
issued  an  order  to  the  United  States  District  Attorney  of 
Kansas  to  bring  suit  to  test  the  validity  of  patents  issued 
to  railroad  companies  for  any  part  of  the  Osage  ceded 
lands.  The  case  was  argued  in  the  United  States  Circuit 
Court  at  Leavenworth,  and  in  August  decided  for  the 
settlers  by  Judges  Miller  and  Dillon.  In  April,  1876,  the 
United  States  Supreme  Court  decided  the  case  for  the 
settlers.  After  seven  years  or  more  of  waiting  and  anx- 
iety, the  settlers  indulged  in  great  rejoicing.    In  March, 

3.  Noble  L.  Prentis  in  the  Champion  of  September  suggested  the  sun- 
flower as  the  state  flower.  "The  capitol  square  is  surrounded  by  a  dense 
growth,  rods  in  width,  of  rampant  sunflowers.  They  grow  as  big,  rank 
and  yellow  as  if  they  were  forty  miles  from  a  house.  The  sunflower 
ought  to  be  made  the  emblem  of  our  State.  Nothing  checks  it  or  kills  it. 
It  is  always  'happy  as  a  big  sunflower.'  Grasshoppers  have  never  held 
the  edge  on  it,  and  in  drouthy  times,  when  everything  else  wilts  and  holds 
up  its  hands,  the  sunflower  continues  business  at  the  old  stand.  It  prob- 
ably has  some  private  arrangement  with  nature  for  securing  aid." 

4.  The  Osage  Indian  lands  covered  the  territory  which  is  now  Neosho, 
Labette  and  parts  of  counties  on  either  side. 


ECONOMIC  GEOWTH.  209 

1880,  the  passage  of  Congressman  Ryan's  Indian  Land 
Bill  opened  the  whole  Kaw  Reservation  to  settlers. 

268.  Other  Events. — During  this  administration  Gen- 
eral Grant  and  President  Hayes^  visited  Kansas.  The 
new  State  Normal  building  at  Emporia  was  finished.  A 
fine  building  at  Washburn  College  was  completed,  and 
Campbell  College  at  Holton  was  organized. 

269.  Election  of  1882. — Governor  St.  John  was  a  can- 
didate for  the  third  term  on  the  Republican  ticket, 
George  W.  Glick  was  the  Democratic  candidate  for  Gov- 
ernor, and  Charles  Robinson  the  Greenback-Labor  Party's 
candidate.    George  W.  Glick  was  elected. 


5.  At  Parsons,  President  Hayes  said  "Kansas  is  the  best-advertised 
state  in  the  Union  and  yon  come  up  to  the  advertisement.  When  you  go 
anywhere,  the  people  naturally  show  you  the  best  thing  they  have.  I 
wondered  what  would  be  the  best  thing  you  would  show  me  here.  You 
took  me  to  see  your  school  house.  There  "is  no  better  advertisement  for  a 
city  or  a  state."  General  Sherman  said,  "I  don't  know  what  mystery  has 
brought  about  the  rapid  development  of  Kansas,  except  the  mystery  of 
education  and   industry." 

Leavenworth  was  the  old  home  of  General  Sherman.  He  practiced  law 
there. 

Review  Questions. — Give  the  dates  of  St.  John's  Administra- 
tion.— What  was  the  burden  of  the  governor  's  message  to  the  Legis- 
lature?—-What  is  the  substance  of  the  prohibition  amendment? — 
When  was  it  adopted  by  the  people? — What  was  the  Exodus? — What 
distinguished  men  were  the  guests  of  Kansas  during  this  adminis- 
tration?— Have  you  read  ''A  Man  Without  a  Country"? — How  is 
Kansas  Day  often  celebrated  by  the  schools?- — How  did  the  sunflower 
come  to  be  the  emblem  of  the  State? — What  was  the  decision  of  the 
United  States  Supreme  Court  on  the  Osage  land  question? 


CHAPTER    XXIV. 


GOVEENOE  CLICK'S  ADMINISTEATIOK 

1883—1885. 

270.  The  Legislature  of  1883.— The  Legislature  of 
1883  re-elected  Preston  B.  Plumb  United  States  Senator. 

271.  Captain  Payne  and  Oklahoma. — In  1880,  Captain 
David  L.  Payne  appeared  as  the  original  ''Oklahoma 
Boomer."  Captain  Payne  was  an  old-time  and  well- 
known   citizen   of  Kansas.     In   1879, 

while  an  employee  of  the  Government 
in  Washington,  he  made  the  discov- 
ery, as  he  believed,  that  the  lands  in 
the  western  part  of  the  Indian  Ter- 
ritory which  had  been  ceded  by  the 
Creeks  to  the  Government  for  occu- 
pation by  other  civilized  tribes,  and 
by  freedmen,  belonged  to  the  public 
lands  of  the  United  States  because 
they  had  not  been  so  occupied.  Be-^^^^"""^^  ""'''''  ^-  ^"^^• 
ginning  in  1880,  parties  of  "boomers,"  as  they  came  to 
be  called,  marched  into  the  coveted  territory  on  an  aver- 
age about  twice  a  year  under  the  command  of  Captain 
Payne.  They  were  as  often  arrested  and  turned  out  by 
the  United  States  troops,  and  held  to  appear  in  the 
United  States  courts,  but  nothing  suppressed  the  boom- 
ers.    On   the   28th   of  November,   1884,   Captain  Payne 

210 


ECONOMIC  GROWTH.  211 

dropped  dead  of  heart  disease  at  Wellington,  Kansas. 
But.  his  work  prospered  in  the  hands  of  Captain  Couch 
and  other  lieutenants,  and  the  agitation  was  transferred 
to  Congress. 

'  272.  Kansas  Philanthropy. — Kansas  having,  in  her 
earlier  and  dryer  days,  freely  received,  in  her  more  pros- 
perous years  freely  gave.  A  destructive  flood  prevailing 
in  the  Ohio  valley  in  the  spring  of  1884,  a  train  of  thirty- 
one  cars,  loaded  with  corn  by  Sedgwick  County  farmers, 
was  dispatched  from  Wichita.  The  cars  were  decked  with 
flags  and  banners  gay,  and  contained  12,400  bushels, 
which  brought  $8,500  at  Cincinnati.  The  Sedgwick 
County  train  was  followed  by  the  Butler  County  train, 
thirty  cars  of  400  bushels  each,  which  sold  for  $8,000. 

The  G.  A.  R.  Post  at  Fort  Scott  shipped  a  load  of  corn 
to  Richmond,  Virginia,  in  aid  of  a  Confederate  Home. 
The  corn  crop  of  1885,  which  was  not  a  remarkable  corn 
year,  was  estimated  to  be  worth  more  money  than  the 
entire  gold  and  silver  product  of  Colorado,  California 
and  Nevada. 

273.  Congfressional  Action  Pertaining  to  Kansas. — In 
1884,  the  United  States  Government  established  Haskell 
Institute,^  a  school  for  teaching  and  training  Indians,  at 
Lawrence.  The  students  are  taught  house-keeping,  dress- 
making, tailoring,  blacksmithing,  carpentering,  etc.,  as 
well  as  common  and  high-school  branches. 

The  Congress  of  1884  also  passed  an  act  for  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  National  Soldiers'  Home  at  Leavenworth. 
It  has  grown  in  buildings,  appointments  and  number  of 

1.  Haskell  Institute  was  named  for  Congressman  Dudley  C.  Haskell 
of-  Lawrence. 


212  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

inmates  to  be  one  of  the  most  important  military  homes 
in  the  country. 

274.  Other  Events. — An  important  publication  of  the 
period  was  Andreas'  History  of  Kansas.  It  is  a  compila- 
tion of  the  facts  of  the  history  of  the  State,  and  is  a 
book  of  great  value  to  the  historian.  During  this  admin- 
istration the  State  Woman's  Suffrage  Association  was 
organized. 

275.  Election  of  1884. — At  the  Republican  Convention 
John  A.  Martin  was  nominated  for  Governor.  G.  W. 
Glick  was  made  the  Democratic"  nominee,  and  H.  L.  Phil- 
lips received  the  nomination  of  the  Greenback-Labor 
Convention.     John  A.  Martin  was  elected. 

In  the  national  election,  Grover  Cleveland  was  elected 
President  of  the  United  States. 


Eeview  Questions. — Tell  of  Captain  Payne  and  Oklahoma. — 
Why  did  he  consider  the  western  part  of  the  Territory  subject  to 
entry  under  public  land  laws? — When  were  Haskell  Institute  and  the 
National  Soldiers'  Home  founded? — Memorize  ''Walls  of  Corn," 


ECONOMIC  GEOWTH. 
WALLS  OF  COEN. 


213 


Smiling  and  beautiful,  heaven  's  dome 
Bends  softly  o  'er  our  prairie  home. 

But  the  wide,  wide  lands  that  stretch  away 
Before  my  eyes  in  the  days  of  May, 

The  rolling  prairie  's  billowy  swell, 
Breezy  upland  and  timbered  dell. 

Stately  mansion  and  hut  forlorn — 
All  are  hidden  by  walls  of  corn. 

All  the  wide  world  is  narrowed  down 

To  the  walls  of  corn,  now  sere  and  brown. 

What  do  they  hold — ^.these  walls  of  corn. 
Whose  banners  toss  in  the  breeze  of  morn? 

He  who  questions  may  soon  be  told : 

A  great  State's  wealth  these  walls  enfold. 

No  sentinels  guard  these  walls  of  corn. 
Never  is  sounded  the  warder's  horn; 


214  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

Yet  the  pillars  are  hung  with  gleaming  gold, 
Left  all  unbarred,  though  thieves  are  bold. 

Clothes  and  food  for  the  toiling  poor, 
Wealth  to  heap  at  the  rich  man's  door; 

Meat  for  the  healthy  and  balm  for  him 
Who  moans  and  tosses  in  chamber  dim. 

Shoes  for  the  barefooted ;  pearls  to  twine 
In  the  scented  tresses  of  ladies  fine; 

Things  of  use  for  the  lowly  cot 

Where  (bless  the  corn!)  want  cometh  not; 

Luxuries  rare  for  the  mansion  grand, 
Booty  for  thieves  that  rob  the  land; — 

All  these  things  and  many  more, 

It  would  fill  a  book  but  to  name  them  o'er. 

Are  hid  and  held  in  these  walls  of  corn, 
Whose  banners  toss  in  the  breeze  of  morn  I 

Where  do  they  stand — these  walls  of  corn? 
Whose  banners  toss  in  the  breeze  of  morn? 

Open  the  atlas,  conned  by  rule. 

In  the  olden  days  of  the  district  school. 

Point  to  this  rich  and  bounteous  land. 
That  yields  such  fruits  to  the  toiler 's  hand. 

"Treeless  desert,"  they  called  it  then, 
Haunted  by  beasts,  forsaken  by  men. 

Little  they  knew  what  wealth  untold 

Lay  hid  where  the  desolate  prairies  rolled. 

Who  would  have  dared,  with  brueh  or  pen. 
As  this  land  is  now,  to  paint  it  then? 

And  how  would  the  wise  ones  have  laughed  in  scorn 
Had  prophet  foretold  these  walls  of  corn. 
Whose  banners  toss  in  the  breeze  of  morn! 

— Ellen  P.  Allerton. 
Written  durang  Governor  Glick's  administration. 


CHAPTER    XXV. 


GOVEENOR  MAETIN'S  ADMINISTRATION. 

1885—1889. 

276.  The  Legislature  of  1885. — The  twenty-first  ses- 
sion of  the  Legislature  was  noted  for  the  number  of  laws 
enacted.    The  most  important  are  given.    John  J.  Ingalls 

was  re-elected  United  States  Senator. 
An  act  providing  for  a  Labor  Bureau 
was  passed;  it  was  thereby  made  the 
duty  of  the  labor  commissioner  to 
visit  mines,  work  shops,  and  factories 
twice  a  year  and  report  on  the  indus- 
trial interests  of  the  State.  An  act 
also  provided  for  uniform  teachers' 
examinations,  and  added    physiology 

Governor  John  A.  Martin,    ^nd    hygiene    tO    the    list    of    SUbjCCtS. 

A  state  board  of  health  was  inaugurated.^ 

277.  State  Institutions.— The  Legislature  of  1885  pro- 
vided for  the  Soldiers'  Orphan  Home  at  Atchison,  and 
for  the  removal  of  the  Asylum  for  Imbecile  Youth  to 
Winfield.  This  asylum  had  been  first  established  at 
Lawrence  in  1881. 

The    State    Reformatory   was   located   at   Hutchinson. 

1.  Silk  culture  was  introduced  into  Kansas  in  1885  in  a  Mennonite 
settlement  so  successfully  that  the  legislature  of  1887  recognized  its  value 
and  passed  the  Silk-Culture  Bill.  A  silk  reeling  station  was  established  at 
Peabody.  Buildings  were  furnished,  eggs  of  the  silk  worm  were  dis- 
tributed and  a  bounty  paid  for  cocoons.  The  silk  worms  live  on  the 
mulberry  tree. 

215 


216  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

The  aim  of  the  institution  is  the  reformation  rather  than 
the  punishment  of  youthful  criminals  between  the  ages 
of  sixteen  and  twenty-five.  The  system  at  the  Reforma- 
tory affords  a  graded  course  of  treatment,  the  condition 
and  comfort  of  the  student  being  made  dependent  upon 
his  conduct. 

278.  Educational  Institutions. — In  1885  Southwestern 
College  was  founded  at  Winfield  by  the  Methodist  Con- 
ference of  Southwestern  Kansas.  John  E.  Earp  was  the 
first  president. 

The  Presbyterian  church  established  Emporia  College 
at  Emporia  in  1885.  In  1886  the  Salina  Wesleyan  was 
established  at  Salina.     This  is  also  a  Methodist  College. 

Cooper  Memorial  College  was  located  at  Sterling  the 
same  year  and  endowed  by  the  United  Presbyterians. 

Midland  College  was  established  by  the  Evangelican 
Lutheran  church  at  Atchison  in  1887. 

A  German  Baptist  Dunkard  College  was  located  at 
McPherson  in  1888,  and  Bethel  College,  a  Mennonite 
school,  at  Newton.  St.  John's  Military  College,  a  school 
for  boys,  under  the  control  of  the  Episcopal  church,  was 
established  at  Salina. 

In  the  year  1887,  812  school  houses  were  built  in 
Kansas. 

279.  National  Educational  Association. — The  National 
Educational  Association  met  in  Topeka  in  July,  1885 ; 
7,000  teachers,  representing  every  part  of  the  United 
States,  were  present  Dr.  Canfield,  of  Kansas  University, 
was  elected  president. 

280.  Wilder 's   Annals. — Wilder 's   Annals   of  Kansas, 


ECONOMIC  GROWTH.  217 

a  book  of  nearly  1,200  pages,  by  D.  W.  Wilder,  was  pub- 
lished in  this  administration.  It  is  a  compilation  of  the 
most  important  events  of  Kansas  history  from  the  days 
of  Coronado  to  the  year  1886. 

'  281.  Amos  A.  Lawrence. — The  announcement  of  the 
death,  at  Nahant,  Mass.,  of  Amos  A.  Lawrence,  was  re- 
ceived with  unusual  tokens  of  respect  at  Lawrence,  a  city 
named  in  his  honor.  Mr.  Lawrence  was  one  of  the  or- 
ganizers of  the  Massachusetts  Emigrant  Aid  Society.  His 
name  was  given  to  the  new  Free  Soil  settlement  in  the 
autumn  of  1854.  In  1856,  at  a  meeting  held  in  Lawrence 
to  institute  a  university,  Mr.  Lawrence  was  chosen  a 
trustee.  A  gift  of  $10,000  in  notes  by  Mr.  Lawrence  for 
educational  purposes,  which  was  turned  over  to  the 
Kansas  State  University  on  its  location  at  Lawrence,  was 
the  first  endowment  of  the  institution. 

Amos  Lawrence  was  regarded,  in  a  sense,  as  the  father 
of  Lawrence  and  of  the  University.  The  manufacturing 
city  of  Lawrence,  Mass.,  was  also  named  in  his  honor,  and 
he  was  the  founder  of  Lawrence  University  at  Appleton, 
Wis. 

282.  Railroad  Strike.— In  March,  1886,  on  the  line  of 
the  Missouri  Pacific  Railway  in  Missouri  and  Kansas,  the 
most  extensive  strike  in  the  history  of  railroads  in  these 
states  began.  The  men  in  the  operative  department  of 
the  road  left  work  at  Sedalia,  Mo.,  on  the  6th  of  March, 
and  thence  the  strike  spread  to  all  the  centers  of  exten- 
sive railroad  employment,  as  Wyandotte,  Atchison  and 
Parsons.  Thirty  engines  were  disabled  at  Atchison,  a 
freight  train  was  wrecked  at  Wyandotte,  and  the  engi- 


218  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

neer  and  fireman  were  killed.  Governor  Martin  held  con- 
sultations with  Governor  Marmaduke  of  IVIissouri  and 
endeavored  to  bring  about  an  arrangement  to  secure 
peace  by  arbitration,  between  the  striking  men  and  the 
railroad  companies.  In  consequence,  however,  of  the 
disturbed  conditions  at  Parsons,  the  Governor  ordered 
the  First  Kansas  Militia  into  the  field.  The  strike  was 
declared  off  in  the  last  of  April.  It  caused  much  suffer- 
ing, both  to  the  working  people  and  the  general  public. 
The  original  cause  was  the  discharge  from  employment 
of  a  foreman  in  the  car  shops,  at  Marshall,  Texas. 

283.  Kansas  at  New  Orleans. — Kansas,  at  the  New 
Orleans  Exposition,  1889,  took  first  prizes  on  wheat,  corn, 
flour,  sorghum,  sugar,  apples,  and  cattle.  Sixty-five  first 
and  second  prizes  were  awarded,  Kansas  thereby  leading 
every  State  in  the  Union. 

284.  Soldier  Census. — The  Legislature  of  1885  made 
provision  for  a  census  of  the  soldier  population  of  the 
State.  It  was  discovered  that  not  far  from  100,000  Kan- 
sans  had  been  enrolled  in  the  army  of  the  Nation.  Sol- 
diers' reunions  became  the  most  popular  festivals. 

285.  National  Cemetery. — The  National  Cemetery  at 
Fort  Leavenworth  was  dedicated  May  30,  1886,  with  mili- 
tary pomp  and  splendor. 

286.  Election  of  1886.— At  the  election  of  1886,  Gover- 
nor Martin  was  the  Republican  candidate  for  re-election. 
Colonel  Moonlight  was  the  Democratic  candidate,  and  C. 
H.  Branscomb  was  the  candidate  of  the  Prohibition 
Party.     Governor  Martin  was  re-elected. 


ECONOMIC  GROWTH.  219 

287.  The  Municipal  Suffrage  Bill.— The  Legislature  of 
1887  passed  the  municipal  suffrage  bill,  which  conferred 
on  women  in  Kansas  at  school,  bond  and  municipal  elec- 
♦tions,  the  same  right  to  vote  possessed  by  men.  The  bill 
received  the  signature  of  Governor  Martin  on  the  14th 
of  February.  About  26,000  women  voted  at  the  follow- 
ing spring  election.  Mrs.  Medora  Salter  was  elected 
Mayor  of  Argonia,  perhaps  the  first  woman  in  the  world 
to  hold  the  office. 

288.  The  Kansas  Boom.— In  the  five  years  from  1880 
to  1885  there  had  been  a  general  prosperity,  which  led  up 
to  a  ''boom"  in  the  towns  and  cities  for  which,  when  it 
was  over,  there  seemed  to  be  no  reasonable  explanation. 
Extensive  additions,  spreading  over  great  areas,  extend- 
ing in  some  instances  miles  from  the  business  centers  of 
the  towns  and  cities,  were  laid  out,  and  real  estate  was 
held  and  sold  at  stupendous  prices.  Bonds  were  issued 
for  all  sorts  of  municipal  improvements.  Electric  light 
plants  and  street  railways  became  numerous.  Water- 
works were  voted  where  the  natural  supply  of  water  was 
hardly  appreciable,  and  hydrants  arose  amid  the  prairie 
grass.  In  cities  of  the  minor  class,  massive  and  imposing 
business  blocks  were  erected  worthy  of  the  solid  and 
long  established  commercial  centers  of  the  country.  In 
the  course  of  tv/elve  months,  extending  into  1886,  ninety- 
four  new  towns  were  chartered.  In  ten  months  of  the 
year  1886,  453  railroad  charters  were  filed  in  the  office 
of  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  by  the  end  of  the  year 

2.  It  was  made  known  through  the  Historical  Society  that  by  con- 
tribution of  $1,000  l)y  Mrs.  Margaret  Northrup  of  Brooklyn,  New  York, 
a  pew  for  citizens,  of  Kansas  had  been  secured  forever  in  the  Metropolitan 
M.  E.  Church   in  Washington,  D.  C. 


220       ■  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

Kansas  led  the  States  in  railroads.  In  1887,  the  great 
Kansas  "boom"  was  still  booming.  Wichita  formed  a. 
good  illustration.  On  the  first  day  of  the  year  it  was 
announced  that  for  the  past  year  her  manufactures,  her 
mercantile  salaries,  her  wholesale  trade,  and  her  bank 
clearings  were  in  the  millions.  The  list  of  real  estate 
sales  made  a  newspaper  column  a  day.  Syndicates  were 
organized  to  deal  in  real  estate  in  many  of  the  towns, 
and  municipal  improvements  multiplied.  The  close  of 
the  year  saw  the  collapse  of  the  "boom." 

289.  Mexican  Pilgrims. — The  passage  through  the 
State,  by  rail,  of  a  party  of  250  Mexican  people  on  a  pil- 
grimage to  Rome,  was  a  reminder  of  the  changed  order 
of  travel  and  transportation.  Such  pilgrimages  had  not 
been  unknown  in  Mexico  before,  but  had  been  undertaken 
entirely  by  sea  from  Mexican  ports.  These  pilgrims 
recognized  the  opening  of  a  great  continental  route 
through  the  United  States  via  Kansas,  eating,  drinking, 
sleeping,  and  assembling  in  the  cars  for  their  devotions 
as  they  journeyed. 

290.  Years  of  Trial  and  Recovery.— The  year  1885- '86 
fell  below  the  usual  productiveness.  The  year  1887  was 
a  year  of  disaster  in  an  agricultural  sense,  being  a  year 
of  severe  drought.  The  pioneers  out  on  the  wide  prairie 
suffered  and  many  of  the  farms  were  mortgaged.  The 
year  1888  was  a  year  of  recovery.  These  periods  of  re- 
covery have  often  been  noticed  in  Kansas  history.  The 
"bad  years"  in  the  first  thirty  years  of  Kansas,  viz., 
1860,  1868,  1870,  1874,  and  1887  were  each  followed  by 
seasons  of  uncommon  fruitfulness. 


ECONOMIC  GEOWTH.  221 

291.  Completion  of  County  Organization. — In  July, 
1888,  Governor  Martin  issued  his  proclamation  organiz- 
ing the  county  of  Greeley,  with  Tribune  as  the  county 
seat.  This  completed  the  organization  of  Kansas  coun- 
ties, 106  in  all.  Subsequently,  the  county  of  Garfield  was 
attached  to  Finney  County,  and  the  number  reduced  to 
105. 

292.  County-Seat  Difficulties. — In  several  counties  of 
the  state,  contests  on  the  location  of  the  county  seat  pre- 
vailed. The  most  tragic  of  these  was  in  Stephens  County 
where  the  contest  between  the  rival  towns  of  Woodsdale 
and  Hugoton  became  very  serious.  Opposing  factions 
fought,  feuds  became  numerous  and  deadly,  and  several 
people,  including  the  Sheriff  of  the  County,  were  killed. 
An  appeal  for  help  was  made  to  the  governor  and  the 
second  regiment  of  Kansas  Militia  was  ordered  to  the 
country  to  preserve  order. 

293.  Remarkable  Fossil  Discovery. — Mr.  S.  S.  Hand 

sent  to  Chancellor  Snow,  of  the  State  University,  a  fossil 
fish,  found  in  Hamilton  county,  and  Professor  Snow 
wrote:  "My  view  about  your  fine  fish  is,  that  it  lived  and 
died  when  what  is  now  Hamilton  county,  more  than 
3,000  feet  above  the  present  sea  level,  was  under  the  salt 
water  ocean.  Remains  of  fishes,  sharks  and  great  sea 
monsters  are  found  abundantly  in  the  rocks  of  Western 
Kansas,  especially  along  the  banks  of  the  Smoky  Hill 
River  and  its  branches.  In  fact,  the  ocean  covered  the 
entire  western  portion  of  the  United  States.  The  Rocky 
Mountains  were  not  upheaved  when  your  fish  lived  and 
died." 


222  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

Kansas  is  an  attractive  field  for  tlie  labors  of  the  paleon- 
tologist, especially  in  the  Niobrara  formation  in  Rooks, 
Ellis  and  Trego  counties.  Of  the  thirteen  fossilized  birds 
of  the  North  American  continent  and  Europe,  catalogued 
in  1873,  seven  species  were  found  in  Kansas.  Of  saurians, 
or  lizards,  thirty-one  are  found  in  the  small  strip  of  the 
Niobrara  in  Kansas  to  four  in  all  of  Europe.  In  the  ocean 
which  covered  what  is  now  Kansas,  sharks  swam  numer- 
ously, as  many  as  three  hundred  of  their  teeth  having 
been  found  in  a  space  of  thirty  inches  square.  The  fossil 
beds  of  Kansas  have  been  intelligently  and  diligently 
searched  for  many  years,  and  invaluable  specimens  have 
been  preserved  in  the  collections  of  the  State  University 
and  other  Kansas  institutions  of  learning,  and  of  Yale 
I^niversity,  where  they  have  attracted  the  attention  of 
the  scientists  of  the  world. ^ 

294.  Death  of  Ex-Governor  Carney.— On  the  30th  of 
July,  Thomas  Carney,  second  Governor  of  Kansas,  the  first 
to  fall  out  of  the  line  of  Kansas  chief  magistrates,  died. 
He  was  buried  in  honor  at  his  long-time  home,  Leaven- 
worth. 

3.  Disappearance  of  the  Buffalo. — It  was  announced  that  the  last 
buffalo  remaining  in  Kansas  was  sold  by  Mr.  C.  J.  Jones  to  a  party  in 
New  York,  and  was  to  leave  the  State.  The  event  created  but  a  senti- 
mental regret.  The  disappearance  of  the  buffalo,  which  existed  in  Kansas 
in  such  numbers,  even  after  the  settlement  of  the  State  had  begun,  as  to 
delay  tlie  passage  of  railroad  trains,  was  regarded  like  the  vanishing  of 
the  'Indian,  as  inevitable  and  not  to  be  deplored.  The  buffalo  served  a 
purpose  in  earliest  days  by  furnishing  his  meat,  hide  and  bones  for  the 
temporary  uses  of  the'  pioneer,  but  the  latter  found  no  difficulty  in  sub- 
sisting without  them  after  the  supply  was  withdrawn.  Much  more  of  a 
loss  than  the  buffalo  himself  was  that  of  the  buffalo  grass,  which  formed 
the  pasturage  of  countless  thousands  of  these  animals  both  winter  and 
summer.  This  began  to  give  way  to  a  coarser  and  less  nutritious  herbage 
with  the  disappearance  of  the  tramping  herds.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was 
claimed  by  competent  observers  that  the  earth  became  more  absorptive  of 
moisture  and  responsive  to  cultivation.  The  disappearance  of  the  buffalo 
wallow,  the  prairie  dog  town,  and  the  botanic  family  of  the  cacti,  marked 
the  surrender  of  the  land  to  fertility  and  civilization. 


ECONOMIC  GROWTH.  223 

295,  David  Ware. — David  Ware,  for  twenty-six  years 
janitor  of  the  Kansas  State  House,  died  in  Topeka,  in 
September,  1888.  He  was  born  a  slave  in  Missouri,  and 
came  to  Kansas  during  the  war.  He 
took  charge  of  the  Capitol  on  its 
first  occupation  by  the  State,  and 
continued  its  custodian  to  the  close 
of  his  life.  His  fidelity  and  honesty 
were  unimpeachable.  His  funeral 
was  attended  by  the  officers  of  the 
State,  and  his  character  was  made 
the  subject  of  eulogy  by  Grovernor 
Martin.  ^^""'^  ware. 

296.  Election  of  1888.— In  November,  1888,  the  na- 
tional and  state  election  occurred..  The  candidates  for 
governor  were  as  follows  :  Republican,  L.  U.  Humphrey ; 
Democrat,  Judge  John  Martin;  Union  Labor,  P.  P.  Elder; 
Prohibition,  A.  M.  Richardson.  L.  U.  Humphrey  was 
elected.  Benjamin  Harrison  was  elected  president  of  the 
United  States  in  the  National  election. 


Review  Questions. — What  important  lahor  laws  were  passed  by 
the  Legislature 'of  1885? — What  State  institutions  were  established? — 
Name  and  locate  the  colleges  that  were  founded  during  Martin's  Ad- 
ministration.— What  noted  association  met  in  Topeka  in  1885? — What 
contribution  was  made  to  Kansas  historical  achievements? — How  did 
Amos  A.  Lawrence  serve  the  State? — What  honors  did  Kansas  win 
at  the  New  Orleans  Exposition? — What  was  the  Municipal  Suffrage 
Bill? — Describe  the  Kansas  boom. — Tell  of  the  years  of  trial  and 
recovery. — How  many  counties  are  in  Kansas  and  what  was  the  last 
one  organized? — Give  Chancellor  Snow's  opinion  of  the  remarkable 
fossil  discovery  in  Hamilton  county. 


POLITICAL  CHANGES. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


-i"y5.*f  ^^-^ 


i^    %■ 


GOVERNOR  HUMPHREY'S  ADMINISTRATION. 

1889—1893. 

297.  Messages  to  the  Legislature. — The  Legislature  of 
1889  assembled  on  the  8th  of  January.  Governor  John 
A.  Martin  delivered  to  the  Legislature  a  retiring,  and 
Governor  L.  U.  Humphrey  an  inau- 
gural message.  The  attention  of  the 
Legislature  was  especially  directed  to 
the  condition  of  the  debtor  classes, 
and  the  ^  need  of  legislation  in  their 
behalf.  Governor  Martin  called  at- 
tention to  the  mortgage  laws.  He 
said:  ''It  should  require  something 
more  than  a  mortgage  to  steal  a 
man's  farm.  Our  chattel  mortgage^^'^^''^^''  ^-  u.  Humphrey, 
laws  invite  outrages  on  property  rights  that  are  as  fla- 
grant as  grand  larceny,  and  the  wrong  and  injustice  that 
has  been  done  under  the  shield  of  these  laws  has  been  a 
disgrace  to  civilized  government." 

298.  Legislative  Acts.— On  the  23rd  of  January,  1889, 
the  joint  session  of  the  Legislature  by  a  unanimous  vote 
elected  Preston  B.  Plumb  United  States  Senator  for  a 
third  term.  The  most  important  acts  were :  An  act  re- 
ducing the  rate  of  interest  by  contract  from  twelve  to  ten 

224 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  '  225 

per  cent  and  the  legal  rate  from  seven  to  six  per  cent ;  an 
act  authorizing  cities  and  townships  to  issue  bonds  and 
to  subscribe  stock  for  sugar  manufactories ;  an  ^ct  to  in- 
crease the  amount  of  bounty  to  be  paid  on  sugar  manu- 
factured in  Kansas  from  $15,000  to  $40,000;  an  act  ap- 
propriating $36,000  for  a  building  for  the  G.  A'.  R.  at 
Ellsworth ;  an  appropriation  to  establish  a  State  Soldiers ' 
Home  whenever  Congress  should  give  one  of  the  National 
Military  Reservations  as  a  site,  and  an  act  receiving  the 
Girls'  Industrial  School. 

299.  The  Girls'  Industrial  School.— The  industrial 
school  for  girls  at  Beloit  which  was  made  a  state  insti- 
tution by  the  Act  of  the  Legislature  of  1889,  had  been 
established  in  1888  by  the  Woman's  Christian  Temperance 
Union,  which  had  donated  to  the  institution  eighty  acres 
of  land. 

300.  Manufacture  of  Sugar. — The  industry  which  most 
engaged  the  energies  of  Kansas  in  1889  was  the  manu- 
facture of  sugar  from  the  sorghum  cane.  For  several 
years  the  attempt  to  manufacture  sugar  at  a  profit  from 
the  native  cane  had  been  carried  on,  and  factories  were 
erected  at  various  points.  The  United  States  Agricul- 
tural Department  had  been  enlisted,  and  Government 
chemists  aided  in  the  experiments.  The  result  of  a  series 
of  costly  experiments  at  Ottawa,  Sterling,  and  other 
places,  was  the  discovery  and  admission  that  sugar  could 
not  be  made  from  the  sorghum  cane  in  paying  quantity  by 
the  ''roller"  process  employed  in  the  treatment  of  the 
Louisiana  cane,  but  the  showing  of  a  series  of  trials  at 


226  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

Fort  Scott  was  claimed  as  demonstrating  the  efficiency  of 
the  "diffusion"  process. 

In  September,  1889,  Jeremiah  M.  Rusk,  United  States 
Secretary  of  Agriculture,  visited  Kansas,  and  published 
that  the  manufacture  of  sugar  was  a  success  beyond  his 
anticipations ;  that  at  Conway  Springs  the  product  of 
sugar  gave  a  profit  of  ten  per  cent. 

301.  Bounty  and  Aid. — The  Legislature  gave  a  bounty 
of  %  cents  a  pound  to  the  amount  of  $40,000.  The  sugar 
crop  of  1889,  on  which  the  State  bounty  was  paid, 
amounted  to  1,293,274  pounds,  and  in  1890  to  1,371,930 
pounds.  Bonds  were  voted  by  municipalities  in  aid  of 
sugar  mills  and  refineries,  the  aid  proposed  reaching,  in 
some  instances,  $100,000  in  bonds.  The  manufacture  was 
continued  for  some  years.  In  1892  but  two  sugar  mills, 
those  at  Medicine  Lodge  and  Fort  Scott,  received  the 
State  subsidy,  the  product  being  998,100  pounds  of  sugar. 
In  the  course  of  events  the  Government  and  State  aid 
was  withdrawn. 

302.  Salt  Industry. — The  salt-making  industry,  which 
had  received  a  considerable  impetus  in  1887,  and,  in  fact, 
had  been  carried  on  to  some  extent  from  the  beginning 
of  the  settlement  of  the  State,  but  which  produced  only 
13,000  bushels  in  1880,  was  enormously  increased  in  1889. 
Early  in  the  year.  Senator  Plumb  made  the  statement  that 
"the  development  of  the  salt  industry  in  Kansas  has  had 
the  effect  of  reducing  the  price  of  salt  in  the  Mississippi 
valley  twenty-five  per  cent,  from  the^  prices  prevailing 
twelve   months   ago."     Wellington  organized  its   eighth 


POLITICAL  CHANGES. 


227 


salt  company.  Hutchinson  already  had  ten  salt  plants 
in  operation,  with  more  in  course  of  construction.  Mc- 
Pherson  had  made  a  promising  start,  and  Kingman, 
Lyons,  Anthony,  Sterling,  Great  Bend,  and  other  points 
were  engaged  in  the  manufacture.  The  salt  deposit  was 
reached  at  depths  varying  from  420  to  925  feet. 


Mill  at  Junction  City,   Kansas. 


303.  Corn. — The  year  1889  was  the  greatest  ''corn 
year,"  so  far,  in  the  agricultural  annals  of  the  State,  the 
figures  being  6,820,693  acres,  with  a  yield  of  273,988,321 
bushels,  valued  at  $51,649,876.18 ;  an  average  yield  of 
40.15  bushels  to  the  acre.  This  inspired  ex-Governor  John 
A.  Martin  to  say  of  Kansas  corn :    ' '  Corn  is  the  sign  and 


228  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

seal  of  a  good  American  agricultural  country;  corn  is  an 
American  institution ;  one  of  the  discoveries  of  the  conti- 
nent. It  was  known  to  the  Indians,  and  to  cultivate  it 
was  one  of  the  few  agricultural  temptations  which  over- 
came their  proud  and  haughty  contempt  for  labor.  Kan- 
sas has  corn  and  so  is  in  luck." 

304.  Kansas  at  the  Paris  Exposition. — Kansas  was 
represented  at  the  Paris  Exposition  of  1889,  and  received 
a  gold  medal  for  the  best  agricultural  report  exhibited ;  a 
silver  medal  for  the  publications  of  the  State  Labor  De- 
partment, and  honorable  mention  for  the  exhibits  of  the 
Douglas  and  Conway  Springs  sugar  manufactories.^ 

305.  Harbor  Convention. — In  response  to  a  call  by 
Governor  Humphrey,  a  convention  of  delegates  from  many 
of  the  Western  and  Southern  States  assembled  at  Topeka, 
October  1,  1889,  to  devise  means  for  securing  a  deep- 
water  harbor  on  the  coast  of  Texas.  Six  hundred  dele- 
gates responded,  including  Governor  Thayer,  of  Nebraska, 
Governor  Francis,  of  Missouri,  seven  ex-Governors,  nine 
Congressmen,  and  many  other  men  of  prominence.  Fifteen 
States  and  Territories  were  represented.  United  States 
Senator  Plumb  presided  over  the  deliberations  of  the 
convention. 

306.  Opening  of  Oklahoma. — Kansas  bore  a  great  part 
in  the  opening  and  occupation  of  Oklahoma.  In  the  early 
months  of  1889  there  was  an  evident  increase  in  the  in- 

1.  Referring  to  the  awards  a't  the  Paris  Exposition,  the  Kansas  City 
.TouT-nal.  a£ter  statiaff  that  Anheuser  took  the  second  premium  for  the 
lager  beer  manufactured  at  St.  Louis,  adds,  "among  the  silver  medals  is 
one  of  the  state  of  Kansas  awarded  to  the  state  department  of  Public 
Instruction  for  Reports  and  School  Work.  Missouri  thus  gets  a  premium 
for  lager  beer  and  Kansas  for  education,     Kansas  is  ahead  at  Paris." 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  229 

terest  felt  in  the  opening  of  this  territory  to  settlement. 
The  so-called  boomers  collected  in  large  numbers  during 
the  winter  at  points  on  the  border,  more  especially  at 
Arkansas  City  and  Caldwell,  awaiting  the  action  of  Con- 
gress. The  progress  of  "the  Bill"  was  followed  with 
alternations  of  hope  and  fear.  At  last  the  suspense  was 
ended  by  the  proclamation  of  the  President  announcing 
the  date  of  the  opening  of  Oklahoma  to  be  at  12  o'clock 
on  April  22,  1889,  and  giving  the  regulations  under  which 
the  1,800,000  acres  of  land  were  to  be  taken. 

307.  Preparation. — The  Cherokee  reservation,  sixty 
miles  wide,  lay  between  Kansas  and  Oklahoma.  It  was 
called  in  common  parlance  "The  Strip."  This  Strip  was 
filled  with  people  prior  to  the  opening  day  and  the  night 
before,  a  line  of  camp  fires  shone  from  the  Kansas  boun- 
dary to  the  Oklahoma  line,  marking  the  route  of  the 
homeseekers.  Everything  was  planned  in  advance.  The 
Government  functionaries  were  waiting  in  the  land  offices 
in  Oklahoma.  The  town  sites  had  been  selected  and 
named.  Guthrie,  destined  to  be  the  capital,  named  in 
honor  of  a  citizen  of  Kansas,  had  its  thousands  of  fore- 
ordained citizens,  as  did  other  townsites. 

308.  The  Race. — A  multitude  of  people  gathered  on 
the  line,  some  in  vehicles  of  varied  description,  some 
mounted  on  the  fleet-footed  race  horse,  others  on  the  wiry 
prairie  pony.  A  troop  of  United  States  cavalry  was 
drawn  up  in  front.  Just  as  the  sun  touched  the  noon  meri- 
dian, a  bugle  sounded,  like  a  call  to  arms,  the  cavalrymen 
moved  forward,  wheeled  to  the  right  and  left  to  clear 
the  way,  and  the   occupying  wave,  made  up   of  40,000 


230  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

human  beings,  swept  into  Oklahoma.  There  was  a  mo- 
ment of  peril  at  the  line,  and  then  the  mass  opened  out 
like  a  fan,  and  all  were  safe.  From  Arkansas  City  six 
great  railroad  trains,  carrying  6,000  people,  moved  in  the 
evening  into  the  new  country.  It  was  estimated  that  the 
population  of  Kansas  was  diminished  by  50,000.  But 
Kansas  is  like  the  wondrous  bush  in  the  wilderness  of  old, 
burning,  but  never  consumed. 

309.  Monument  to  General  Grant.— On  the  17th  of 
September  at  Fort  Leavenworth  the  first  monument 
erected  in  the  United  States  in  memory  of  General  Grant 
was  unveiled.  The  statue  is  by  Lorado  Taft.  George  R. 
Peck  delivered  on  the  occasion  an  impressive  dedicatory 
address. 

310.  Death  of  John  A.  Martin.— On  the  2d  of  October, 
1889,  John  A.  Martin,  tenth  Governor  of  Kansas,  died  at 
Atchison.  He  came  to  Kansas  from  Pennsylvania,  his 
native  state,  in  1857,  his  eighteenth  year,  and  soon  became 
editor  and  proprietor  of  the  "Atchison  Champion."  Mr. 
Martin  was  distinguished  as  a  Kansas  journalist,  states- 
man and  soldier  from  his  early  youth.  He  was  secretary 
of  the  Wyandotte  Constitutional  Convention,  and  a 
member  of  the  first  State  Senate. 

311.  Honorable  David  J.  Brewer,  Associate  Justice. — 
On  January  6,  1890,  Honorable  David  J.  Brewer  was 
sworn  in  as  an  Associate  Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court  of 
the  United  States.  Judge  Brewer  for  years  had  occupied 
the  District  and  Supreme  Court  bench  of  Kansas,  and 
his  choice  to  the  highest  court  of  the  nation  was  regarjied 
as  an  honor  paid  the  State. 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  231 

312.  Chancellor  of  the  State  University. — The  choice 
of  Professor  Francis  Huntington  Snow,  in  1890,  as  Chan- 
cellor of  the  Kansas  State  University, 

brought  to  the  head  of  the  institu- 
tion a  man  learned  in  many  things, 
and  especially  in  that  which  pertained 
to  Kansas.  Chancellor  Snow  began 
his  w^ork  in  the  University  in  1866, 
and  employed  the  years  to  study 
matters  of  interest  in  Kansas.  His 
appointment  was  a  reward  for  years 
of  earnest  service. 

Chancellor  F.  H.  Snow,  Uni- 

313.  Completion  of  Land  Sale  by  ^^^^^^ty  of  Kansas. 
Santa  Fe. — The  land  agents  of  the  Atchison,  Topeka  and 
Santa  Fe  Railroad  Company  held  a  meeting  in  Topeka 
to  mark  the  close  of  the  great  land  selling  enterprise  of 
that  company,  which  was  carried  on  for  nearly  twenty 
years,  and  which  had  disposed  of  an  empire.  The  sys- 
tem by  which  millions  of  acres  passed  from  the  hands 
of  the  Government,  and  of  a  corporation,  into  the  pos- 
session and  ownership  of  individuals,  with  scarcely  a 
trace  of  friction,  was  a  business  miracle. 

It  was  announced,  in  1890,  that  Kansas  Division,  Union 
Pacific,  was  the  only  railroad  company  having  any  por- 
tion of  its  original  grant  for  sale. 

314.  Original  Package  Case. — The  controversy  be- 
tween the  advocates  and  opposers  of  the  Prohibition  Law 
increased  in  ])itterness  during  this  administration.  The 
former  were  greatly  enraged  by  the  sudden  appearance 
in  the  State,  at  many  different  points,  of  liqaor  stores, 
acting,  as  they  claimed,  under  the  authority  of  a  decision 


232  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

of  the  United  States  Supreme  Court,  in  what  was  called, 
the  Original  Package  Case.  The  Court,  or  a  majority, 
three  justices  dissenting,  held  that  intoxicating  liquors 
formed  an  article  of  commerce  to  be  transported  like 
any  other  article,  and  that  no  State  had  the  power  to 
prevent  the  importation  of  liquors  in  unbroken,  original 
packages. 

315.  Wilson  Bill. — The  excitement  caused  was  great. 
Large  public  meetings  were  held  to  denounce  the  original 
package  saloons;  the  keepers  were  in  some  instances 
ordered  out  of  town;  in  some  cases  the  liquors  were 
shipped,  by  the  citizens,  back  whence  they  came.  Many 
of  the  liquor/  sellers  were  arrested  as  violators  of  the 
law,  but  were  usually  discharged  by  the  courts  by  virtue 
of  the  Supreme  Court  decision.  At  last  remedial  legisla- 
tion was  sought.  Congress  was  appealed  to,  and  the  re- 
sult was  the  passage  of  the  ''Anti-Original  Package 
Law,"  or  the  Wilson  Bill,  which  established  the  right  of 
a  State  to  exercise  its  police  power  over  any  articles  sent 
into  it,  whether  in  the  original  packages  or  otherwise. 
This  ended  one  form  of  attempt  to  do,  in  the  State  of 
Kansas,  that  which  the  State  says  shall  not  be  done. 

316.  The  Eleventh  Census.— In  1890  the  eleventh  cen- 
sus of  the  United  States  was  taken.  The  population  of 
Kansas,  as  published  by  the  Government  Census  Depart- 
ment, was  placed  at  1,427,096. 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  PEOPLE 'S  PAETY. 

317.  The  Farmers'  Alliance. — The  Farmers'  Alliance, 
which  had  attained  prominence,  in  1889,  as  a  secret  and 
social  organization  composed  of  farmers,  and  devoted  to 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  233 

the  interests  of  all  agriculturists,  and  admitting  to  its 
membership  men  and  women,  became,  in  1890,  an  active 
political  force. 

.  The  impelling  and  controlling  sentiment  that  led  to  the 
organization  of  the  Alliance,  was  the  belief  that  in  the 
conduct  of  government,  and  the  making  of  laws,  the  farm- 
ing, and,  indeed,  the  laboring  classes  generally,  had  been 
neglected  or  discriminated  against;  that  capital  was 
allowed  undue  weight;  that  corporations  were  allowed 
full  sweep  for  unjust,  avaricious  and  oppressive  disposi- 
tion, and  escaped  their  just  burden  of  taxation ;  that  the 
loaner  of  money  had  all  the  advantage  in  his  transac- 
tions with  the  borrower;  the  mortgagee  of  the  mort- 
gagor; and  that  a  Government  originally  designed  on 
the  basis  of  the  freedom  and  equality  of  all  men,  had 
become  perverted. 

318.  Measures  Urged. — The  Farmers'  Alliance  urged 
measures  of  relief  for  the  debtor  class;  a  stay  law  for  a 
period  of  two  years;  various  measures  for  the  benefit  of 
mortgagors,  and  for  the  help  of  the  shipper  and  the 
passenger  as  against  the  railroad  companies,  who,  it  was 
claimed,  were  deriving  an  exorbitant  income  from  their 
rates,  at  the  expense  of  the  public. 

The  Alliance  asked  for  a  law  requiring  land  sold  under 
foreclosure  to  bring  the  amount  of  the  judgment  and 
costs;  a  law  that  should  make  the  State  Railroad  Com- 
missioners elective  by  the  people ;  that  should  make  United 
States  Senators  elective  by  the  people,  and  various  enact- 
ments and  regulations  that  should  give  the  people  the 
opportunity  to  exercise  their  power  directly,  rather  than 
by  delegated  agents. 


234  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

The  complaint  of  all  might  be  summed  up  as  too  much 
taxation;  too  much  mortgage;  too  much  reign  of  the 
rich;  too  little  consideration  of  the  poor;  too  much  debt. 
The  county  indebtedness  of  Kansas  had  doubled  in  the 
ten  years  between  1880  and  1890. 

319.  A  New  Party. — While  there  were  some  dis- 
avowals of  any  intention  on  the  part  of  the  Alliance, 
separately  or  collectively,  to  take  action  after  the  manner 
of  a  political  party,  it  was  quite  impossible  that  it  should 
happen  otherwise.  Many  local  Alliances  declared  their 
intention  to  act  together  in  support  of  certain  political 
tenets,  and  particularly  in  opposition  to  certain  political- 
leaders  of  the  old  parties.  A  new  party  seemed  inevi- 
table. 

320.  The  Populist  Party. — At  a  convention  assembled 
at  Topeka,  June  12,  1890,  delegates  representing  the 
Farmers'  Alliance,  the  Industrial  Union,  the  Patrons  of 
Husbandry,  the  Knights  of  Labor,  the  Farmers'  Mutual 
Benefit  Association,  and  the  Single  Tax  Clubs,  organized 
the  People's  Party,  as  it  called  itself  in  the  State  of  Kan- 
sas, or  the  Populist  Party,  as  it  came  to  be  popularly 
designated.  Hon.  B.  H.  Clover,  president  of  the  Farmers' 
Alliance,  was  chairman  of  the  convention  at  which  the 
People's  Party  was  organized. 

321.  The  Election  of  1890.— At  the  State  election  in 
November,  1890,  four  tickets  were  placed  in  the  field. 
The  Republican  was  headed  by  Governor  Humphrey,  who 
was  nominated  for  re-election ;  the  Democratic  was 
headed  by  ex-Governor  Charles  Robinson;  the  People's 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  235 

Party,  by  John  F.  Willitts,  and  the  Prohibitionists  were 
led  by  Rev.  A.  M.  Richardson.  Governor  Humphrey  was 
re-elected.    The  People's  Party  elected  a  large  number  of 

State  legislators. 

THE  LEGISLATUEE   OF   1891. 

322.  The  Election  of  United  States  Senator.— The  Leg- 
islature began  its  session  on  January  13.  As  the  adhe- 
rents of  the  new  People's  or  Farmers'  Alliance  Party 
were  in  control  of  the  Lower  House  and  of  both  Houses 
on  joint  ballot,  the  proceedings  of  the  session  were 
watched  by  the  public  with  great  interest.  On  the  28th 
of  January,  Wm.  A.  Peffer  received  101  votes  for  United 
States  Senator,  and  was  declared  elected.  Senator  Ingalls 
retired  from  an  honorable  service  of  eighteen  years  in 
the  United  States  Senate,  over  which  he  was  for  four 
years  the  presiding  officer  and  where  he  had  been  a  promi- 
nent figure  in  the  Nation's  affairs. 

323.  Acts  of  the  Legislature. — Important  acts  of  the 
session  provided  a  system  of  law  for  the  promotion  of 
irrigation;  declared  that  all  natural  waters,  whether 
standing  or  running,  and  whether  surface  or  subter- 
raneaUj  in  that  portion  of  the  State  west  of  the  ninety- 
ninth  meridian,  should  be  devoted,  first,  to  purposes  of 
irrigation  in  aid  of  agriculture  subject  to  ordinary  domes- 
tic uses,  and  second,  to  other  industrial  purposes,  and 
might  be  diverted  from  the  natural  beds,  basins,  or 
channels  for  such  purposes  and  uses. 

Eight  hours  was  declared  to  constitute  a  day's  work 
for  all  laborers,  workmen,  mechanics,  or  other  persons 


236  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

employed  by  or  in  behalf  of  the  State,  or  by  or  in  behalf 
of  any  county,  city,  township,  or  other  municipality  of 
the  State.  The  first  Monday  in  September  of  each  year 
was  declared  a  >legal  holiday  to  be  known  as  Labor  Day. 
Associations  and  unions  of  workingmen  were  protected 
in  their  labels,  trademarks,  and  forms  of  advertising. 
A  law  was  enacted  to  prevent  ownership  of  land  by  non- 
resident aliens  or  corporations,  incorporated  under  the 
laws  of  any  foreign  country.  Provision  was  made  for 
submitting  to  the  people  at  the  November  election  in 
1892  the  question  whether  a  convention  should  be  called 
to  revise,  amend,  or  change  the  State  Constitution. ^ 

324.  Appropriations  of  the  Session. — Sixty  thousand 
dollars  was  appropriated  to  continue  the  construction  of 
the  main  building  and  wings  of  the  State  House.  An 
appropriation  of  $3,500  was  made  to  establish  an  experi- 
ment station  at  the  State  University,  to  propagate  the 
contagion  or  infection  supposed  to  be  destructive  to 
chinch  bugs,  and  to  furnish  it  to  farmers  free  of  charge. 
The  sum  of  $60,000  was  appropriated  to  purchase  seed 
grain  for  those  farmers  who  lost  their  crop  by  reason 
of  the  drought  of  1890.  This  Legislature  also  accepted 
the  provisions  of  an  Act  of  Congress  granting  aid  for 
the  endowment  and  support  of  colleges  of  agriculture 
and  the  mechanic  arts. 

335.  Chancellor  Snow's  Discovery. — Not  only  are  the 
Kansas  beasts  of  the  field  and  the  fowls  of  the  air  objects 

2.  The  people  of  the  State  defeated  the  proposition  to  change  the  State 
Constitution  as  dangerous  to  the  prohibition  clause. 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  237 

of  ceaseless  study  and  report,  but  the  insects,  especially 
those  noxious  and  harmful  to  the  husbandman,  are  under 
constant  surveillance.     One  result  of  this  is  historical. 

In  1888,  "Professor  Snow,  of  the  State  University, 
learned  that  the  chinch  bugs  of  the  State  were  dying  of 
a  disease  characterized  by  the  appearance  of  a  white  or 
gray  fungus.  This  was  the  first  discovery.  He  next  dis- 
covered that  the  disease  was  infectious,  that  it  might  be 
communicated  by  infected  to  healthy  bugs.  This  was  the 
second  discovery,  and  a  Kansas  newspaper  volunteered 
the  information  that  Professor  Snow  would  send  the  in- 
fectious material  on  application.  Within  a  few  days 
Professor  Snow  received  requests  from  nine  different 
States. 

The  discovery  was  followed  up  with  true  Kansas  ardor. 
Thousands  of  packages  of  the  infection  were  distributed 
over  the  'State,  and  reports  received  from  thousands  of 
experimenters.  The  Legislature  of  1891  made  an  appro- 
priation in  aid  of  Professor  Snow's  experimental  station 
at  the  University.  In  1894,  8,000  packages  of  the  infec- 
tion were  sent  out  to  individual  farmers  in  Kansas,  Mis- 
souri and  Oklahoma.  In  the  meantime  the  States  of 
Nebraska,  Iowa,  Missouri,  and  Illinois  had  followed  the 
example  of  Kansas,  and  had  established  their  own  dis- 
tributing stations.  The  general  result  of  the  labor  and 
investigation  kept  up  for  years,  was,  that  the  farmer  may 
possess  a  partial,  if  not  entire,  protection  against  one  of 
the  most  destructive  of  the  enemies  of  his  fields. 

326.  Discovery  of  Alfalfa. — One  of  the  discoveries  of 
agricultural  Kansas  for  the  year  1891  was  that  of  alfalfa. 


238  HisTOEY  OF  Kansas. 

In  the  spring  of  that  year  the  secretary  of  the  State 
Board  of  Agriculture  received  such  reports  of  its  value 
that  he  arranged  a  place  for  it  in  his  statistical  rolls,  and 
the  assessors  were  requested  to  give  the  acreage  of  alfalfa 
separate  from  other  tame  grasses.  Alfalfa  had  been  cul- 
tivated in  the  old  world  more  than  2,000  years,  and  was 
introduced  into  Mexico  and  South  America  by  the  Span- 
iards. In  1854  it  was  brought  from  Chili  to  California, 
whence  it  spread  to  the  states  of  the  Rocky  Mountains, 
and  later  the  Central  West. 

327.  Relief  for  Russia. — The  settlers  from  Russia,  lo-. 
cated  in  Ellis  County,  in  view  of  the  great  famine  pre- 
vailing in  the  districts  of  Russia,  whence  they  came,  sent 
$10,000  to  the  suffering,  and  an  agent  to  bring  a  party 
of  over  300  families  of  their  countrypeople  to  Kansas. 

328.  John   A.  Anderson,    United   States    Consul. — In 

February,  1891,  John  A.  Anderson,  of  Kansas,  was  con- 
firmed as  United  States  Consul-General  to  Egypt.  He 
was  destined  never  to  behold  his  native  land  again.  He 
died  at  Liverpool,  England,  while  returning  to  the  United 
States  on  leave.  He  was  a  man  of  striking  character  and 
force  of  purpose,  who  made  his  mark  as  President  of  the 
State  Agricultural  College,  and  afterwards  represented 
Kansas  in  Congress  for  five  terms.  Mr.  Anderson  was 
one  of  Kansas'  most  efficient  statesmen.  No  man  from 
the  State  ever  did  better  work  in  the  National  House  of 
Representatives.  One  of  the  laws  of  which  he  was  author 
is  the  two-cent  postage  law. 

329.  Colonel  N.  S.  Goss.— Colonel  N.  S.  Goss  fell  dead 


POLITICAL  CHANGES. 


239 


Colonel   N.    S.    Goss. 


of  heart  disease,  at  Neosho  Falls,  where  he  was  visiting 
friends,  on  the  10th  of  March,  1891.  He  was  an  old  resi- 
dent of  Kansas,  a  man  of  business  and 
fortune,  and  an  ornithologist  of  rare 
attainments.  The  passion  of  his  life 
was  the  study  and  collection  of  birds. 
In  his  pursuit  he  ranged  from  Labra- 
dor to  Guatemala,  and  on  his  death 
left  to  the  State  the  fine  collection  of 
birds,  all  mounted  and  arranged  by 
himself,  which  is  preserved  in  the 
State  Capitol  at  Topeka,  and  is  known 
as  the  "Goss  Ornithological  Collection."  The  last  work 
of  Colonel  Goss'  life  was  the  publication  of  "Birds  of 
Kansas,"  a  work  of  great  value,  embodying  the  labors  and 
personal  observations  of  years,  and  standing  alone  in  the 
Kansas  literature  of  its  class. 

330.  Death  of  Preston  B.  Plumb.— On  December  20, 
1891,  Preston  B.  Plumb,  United  States  Senator  from  Kan- 
sas, died  after  a  brief  illness,  caused  by  overwork,  at 
Washington,  D.  C.  The  vacancy  in  the  United  States 
Senate  occasioned  by  the  death  of  Senator  Plumb  was 
filled  on  the  1st  of  January,  1892,  by  the  appointment  by 
Governor  Humphrey  of  Hon.  Bishop  W.  Perkins,  making 
the  third  time  in  the  history  of  the  State  when  this  office 
had  been  filled  by  appointment  of  the  Governor.  Mr. 
Perkins  had  served  three  years  in  the  Army  of  the  Union, 
in  line  and  staff  positions ;  and  in  Kansas  on  the  judicial 
bench  and  in  the  lower  House  of  Congress. 

331.  Election  of  1892.— The  year  1892  was  the  year 
of  a  Presidential  election,  a  political  year,  and  business 


240  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

was  affected  in  Kansas,  as  in  all  the  rest  of  the  country. 
In  Kansas  the  political  revolution  was  made  complete. 
The  entire  People's  Party  State  ticket  was  elected. 
Lorenzo  D.  Lewelling  became  Governor.  The  candidates 
at  the  head  of  the  other  State  tickets  were  as  follows: 
Republican,  A.  W.  Smith;  Prohibition,  I.  0.  Pickering. 
The  Democratic  Party  united  with  the  People's  Party. 
Grover  Cleveland  was  elected  President  on  the  National 
ticket. 


Eeview  Questions. — What  was  the  burden  of  Eetiring  Gov- 
ernor Martin's  message  to  the  Legislature  of  1889? — What  aflflietion 
other  than  drouth  and  failure  of  crops  did  the  pioneer  suffer  from? — 
What  law  was  enacted  as  a  result  of  Governor  Martin's  message? — 
Eelate  the  history  of  the  Girls '  Industrial  School. — Tell  of  the  manu- 
facture of  sugar  and  the  encouragement  given  it  by  the  Legislature. — 
Give  an  estimate  of  the  value  of  the  agricultural  and  the  mineral  pro- 
ductions of  Humphrey's  Administration. — Tell  of  the  opening  of 
Oklahoma. — How  did  it  affect  Kansas? — What  State  erected  the  first 
monument  to  General  Grant,  and  who  was  the  sculptor? — What  noted 
Kansan  delivered  the  dedicatory  address? — What  national  recognition 
came  to  a  Kansan  during  Governor  Humphrey's  Administration? — 
When  did  Dr.  Snow  become  chancellor  of  the  State  University? — See 
his  biography  for  an  account  of  his  service. — What  was  the  Original 
Package  Case? — What  measure  was  passed  to  control  it? — Tell  of  the 
development  of  the  People 's  Party. — What  were  the  results  of  the 
election  of  1890  and  of  the  senatorial  election  of  1891? — Name  some 
interesting  acts  of  the  Legislature  of  1891. — What  important  dis- 
covery was  made  by  Chancellor  Snow  during  this  administration? — 
Give  the  history  of  alfalfa. — What  famous  men  died  during  this 
administration? 

Cyclone  at  Harper  and  Wellington. — On  the  27th  of  May,  1892,  the 
towns  of  Harper  and  Wellington  were  visited  by  a  tornado,  and  ten  per- 
sons killed,  a  large  number  wounded,  and  a  vast  amount  of  property 
destroyed.  The  storm  was  amons:  the  most  destructive  of  the  manv  which 
have  visited  the  State,  and  excited  special  horror  from  the  fact  that  the 
fatal  bolt  was  sped  after  nightfall. 

Science  and  the  Cyclone. — What  has  been  called  the  "Kansas  cyclone" 
is  not  peculiar  to  Kansas,  but  has  been  known  in  all  parts  of  the  United 
States ;  more  especially  in  the  great  area  between  the  Allegheny  and 
Rocky  mountains. 


CHAPTER    XXVII. 

GOVERNOE  LEWELLING'S  ADMINISTRATION. 

1893—1895. 

332.  Inauguration  of  the  Executive. — Governor  Lewel- 
ling  was  inaugurated  on  the  9th  of  January,  1893. 

333.  Organization  of  the  Senate. — On  the  10th  a  Leg- 
islature assembled  which  was  destined  to  a  stormy,  and 
at  times  anxious  existence.  The  Senate  was  organized 
under  the  presidency  of  the  Lieutenant-Governor,  Percy 
Daniels,  at  twelve  o'clock.  The  Populists  had  a  majority 
in  the  Senate. 


THE  LEGISLATIVE  WAR. 

334.  Attempted  Organization  of  the  House. — As  shown 
by  the  certificates  of  election,  the  Republicans  had  a 
majority  in  the  House,  but  the  Popu- 
lists claimed  a  majority,  contending 
that  fraudulent  measures  had  been 
used  in  the  election  of  1892.  The 
members  of  the  House  assembled  in 
the  hall;  both  parties  claimed  the 
right  to  organize  the  House,  and  the 
contest  began.  R.  S.  Osborn,  Secre- 
tary of  State,  appeared  and  stated 
that  he  did  not  wish  to  deliver  the 

241 


Governor    Lewelling. 


242  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

roll  of  members  certified  as  elected  by  the  State  Board 
of  Canvassers,  in  the  absence  of  a  presiding  officer.  A 
motion  that  the  Secretary  of  State  preside  temporarily 
was  objected  to,  and  he  departed,  taking  the  roll  with 
him.  Both  parties  then  proceeded  to  organize  the  House, 
the  Republicans  electing  George  L.  Douglas  Speaker,  and 
the  Populists,  J.  M.  Dunsmore.  Both  Speakers  occupied 
the  same  desk,  and  during  the  first  night  slept  under  the 
same  blanket  on  the  floor  in  the  rear  of  the  Speaker's 
desk,  each  one  with  a  gavel  in  his  hand. 

335.  Dunsmore  House  Recognized. — On  the  third  day 
of  the  session.  Governor  Lewelling  recognized  the  Duns- 
more, or  Populist,  House  as  the  legal  body,  and  on  the 
fourth  day  the  Senate  took  the  same  action,  the  Repub- 
lican Senators  formally  protesting.  The  two  contending 
bodies  continued  to  sit  on  different  sides  of  Representa- 
tive Hall  for  some  days.  In  time,  an  arrangement  was 
made  by  which  one  body  met  in  the  forenoon  and  the 
other  in  the  afternoon.  Numerous  attempts  were  made 
by  various  parties  to  effect  a  settlement,  but  in  vain.  On 
the  17th  of  January  Governor  Lewelling  sent  in  his  mes- 
sage to  the  Senate,  where  it  was  read,  and  to  the  Populist 
House,  which  ordered  it  printed. 

336.  Election  of  United  States  Senator. — On  January 
25,  in  the  midst  of  the  disturbances,  the  Senate  and  House 
met  in  joint  session,  presided  over  by  Lieutenant-Gov- 
ernor Daniels.  John  Martin  received  eighty-six  votes,  and 
was  declared  elected  United  States  Senator.  The  Repub- 
lican members  held  a  joint  session,  and  gave  Joseph  W. 
Ady  seventy-seven  votes.  The  United  States  Senate 
seated  John  Martin. 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  243 

337.  The  Arrest  of  Sergeant-at-Arms. — In  order  to  get 
the  subject  before  the  Supreme  Court,  L.  C.  Gunn  was 
arrested  by  a  sergeant-at-arms  of  the  Republican  House 
on  a  charge  of  neglecting  to  obey  a  mandate  of  that 
body.  Mr.  Gunn  asked  to  be  discharged  on  the  ground 
that  the  Republican  House  was  not  the  lawful  House  of 
Representatives  and  had  no  authority  to  order  his  arrest. 

338.  Contest  for  the  Hall. — While  this  case  was  pend- 
ing, stirring  events  were  destined  to  occur.  On  the  14th 
of  February  an  attempt  was  made  by  two  deputy  ser- 
geants-at-arms  of  the  Republican  House  to  arrest  Ben 
C.  Rich,  Chief  Clerk  of  the  Populist  House,  on  a  charge 
of  ''contempt."  After  a  sharp  scuffle,  Mr.  Rich  was  res- 
cued by  his  friends,  and  soon  after  appeared  in  triumph 
in  the  Populist  House.  Governor  Lewelling  directed  the 
Adjutant-General  to  call  out  a  company  of  militia  if 
necessary.  On  the  night  of  the  14th,  the  officers  of  the 
Populist  House  barricaded  the  door  of  the  Hall  of  Rep- 
resentatives. On  the  morning  of  the  15th,  the  Republican 
House,  headed  by  their  Speaker,  appeared,  thrust  aside 
the  outer  guards,  smashed  in  the  door  with  a  sledge 
hammer,  entered  and  took  possession. 

339.  The  Douglas  House  Besieged. — Governor  Lewel- 
ling called  out  several  companies  of  State  militia;  guns 
were  brought  out  of  the  State  arsenal ;  a  gatling  gun 
and  artillerists  were  ordered  from  Wichita.  On  the  other 
side,  Sheriff  Wilkinson,  of  Shawnee  County,  who  had  de- 
clined a  summons  from  both  Speaker  Dunsmore  and  the 
Governor,  announced  himself  as  the  regular  custodian  of 
the  peace  of  the  county,  marched  a  force  of  deputies  into 
the  State  House,  and  joined  the  large  force  of  sergeants- 


244  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

at-arms  of  the  Republican  House.  The  Republican  House 
was,  in  a  sense,  beleaguered,  but  was  supplied  with  pro- 
visions passed  through  the  lines. 

340.  Close  of  the  Contest. — The  siege  was  not  destined 
to  last  long.  On  the  16th  Governor  Lewelling  appeared, 
and  requested  that  the  force  occupying  the  Hall  of  Rep- 
resentatives turn  it  over  to  him  for  the  night.  This  was 
refused.  A  committee  of  citizens  of  Topeka  besought  the 
Republican  House  to  yield,  and  avoid  a  bloody  contest 
with  the  militia.  This  proposition  was  received  with  in- 
difference. Negotiations  finally  resulted  in  an  agreement, 
on  the  17th,  that  the  Republican  House  should  continue 
to  hold  the  hall;  that  the  Populist  House  should  meet 
elsewhere ;  that  the  deputies  and  the  militia  should  retire, 
and  that  the  proceedings  against  Chief  Clerk  Rich  should 
be  abandoned.  This  ended  what  has  been  called  the 
"Legislative  War"  of  1893,  in  which,  happily,  no  lives 
were  lost.  It  is  earnestly  hoped  that  such  an  occurrence 
will  never  happen  again  in  the  State. 

341.  Decision  of  the  Supreme  Court. — On  the  25th  the 
decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  Gunn  case  was  ren- 
dered. Chief  Justice  Horton  affirmed  the  constitution- 
ality of  the  Republican  House,  in  which  view  Associate 
Justice  Johnston  concurred,  and  from  which  Associate 
Justice  Allen  dissented. 

342.  The  House  Organized.— On  the  28th  of  February, 
the  late  Populist  House  appeared,  headed  by  the  ser- 
geant-at-arms  carrying  the  American  flag,  and  spread 
upon  the  record  their  formal  protest.  The  two  Houses 
then  became  the  one  House  of  Representatives  of  the 
State  of  Kansas.    An  eye-witness  remarks  of  the  appear- 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  245 

ance  of  Topeka  during  the  "Legislative  War":  "No 
other  capital  city  on  earth  could  have  passed  through 
such  a  scene  of  conflict  without  serious  loss  of  life,  and, 
it  is  also  likely,  great  destruction  of  property.  The 
absence  of  the  saloon  is  the  chief  explanation." 

343.  The  State  University  Library  Building.— In  1893 
the  Regents  of  the  Kansas  State  University  decided  to 
devote  the  bequest  of  $90,000,  given  to  the  University 
by  Mr.  William  B.  Spooner,  of  Boston,  to  the  erection  of 
the  fine  fireproof  library  building  of  the  University,  which 
bears  Mr.  Spooner 's  name.^ 

KANSAS   AT    THE    COLUMBIAN  EXPOSITION. 

344.  The  Kansas  Building. — At  the  World's  Columbian 
Exposition  in  Chicago,  in  celebration  of  the  discovery  of 
America,  Kansas  took  her  part  among  her  sister  states. 
The  Kansas  State  Building,  which  was  a  very  beautiful 
one,  was  located  near  the  Fifty-seventh  Street  entrance 
and  in  the  vicinity  of  Mount  Vernon,  a  reduced  copy  of 
the  home  of  Washington,  presented  by  the  State  of  Vir- 
ginia.   On  the  opening  of  the  festivities  of  Kansas  Week, 

2.  On  the  occasion  of  the  dedication  of  the  Spooner  Library,  in  1894, 
Hon.  D..  W.  Wilder  wrote  :  "It  is  now  too  late  to  accept  your  kind  invi- 
tation. I  should  be  the  only  guest,  probably,  who  had  seen  Mr.  Spooner, 
and  seen  him  a  great  many  times.  I  was  a  schoolboy,  the  son  of  an  anti- 
slavery  father.  I  attended  many  meetings  of  the  anti-slavery  folks,  a 
very  small  band.  Not  one  person  in  ten  thousand. in  Boston,  in  those 
days,  forty-six  years  ago,  was  an  avowed  Abolitionist.  Some  of  the 
meetings,  in  the  days  of  mobs  and  violence,  had  a  few  dozen  of  the  fear- 
less and  faithful  present.  The  stalwart  figure  of  the  sincere  and  fearless 
Wm.  B.  Spooner  was  always  to  be  seen.  Sometimes  he  spoke.  No  doubt, 
he  always  helped  the  feeble  cause  with  his  purse,  as  well  as  his  voice  and 
influence.  One  unknown  boy  will  never  forget  his  face,  his  person,  bis 
heroism.     Ho  was  as  true  as  his  friends.  Garrison  and  Phillips. 

"Let  the  young  men  and  women  of  Kansas,  who  now  enjoy  the  gift  of 
this  noble  man,  remember  that  it  comes  from  a  pioneer  in  the  cause  of 
freedom,  the  cause  that  made  for  them  a  new  and  glorious  country.  And 
let  the  books  upon  the  shelves  of  the  Spooner  Library  give  a  true  history 
of  the  anti-slavery  conflict." 


246  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

Governor  Lewelling,  representing  the  State,  responded 
most  excellently  to  the  gracious  address  of  welcome  by 
the  president  of  the  Exposition. 

345.  The  Woman's  Department. — The  Woman's  De- 
partment had  a  room  allotted  to  it  in  the  Kansas  Building, 
but  woman's  taste,  skill,  and  industry  were  in  evidence 
in  all  of  the  rooms,  and  in  all,  the  pioneer  woman,  the 
first  woman,  who  builded  with  the  others  in  laying  the 
foundations  of  the  State,  was  represented  by  the  work  of 
her  toiling  hands. 

346.  Educational  Exhibit. — The  educational  exhibit  of 
Kansas  was  extensive,  representing  an  expenditure  of 
$12,000.  The  Kansas  schools  of  all  grades,  from  the 
common  schools  to  the  great  State  institutions,  made  a 
remarkable  showing  in  the  immense  exhibition,  which  in 
the  Liberal  Arts  Building  alone  covered  four  acres  of 
wall  and  floor  space.  It  seemed  that  everything  that 
brain  and  hand  may  accomplish  in  the  schoolroom  was 
exhibited. 

347.  Collection  of  Professor  Dyche. — In  the  annex  to 
the  main  building  was  displayed  the  great  collection  of 
Professor  Dyche,  of  the  State  University,  comprising  121 
specimens  of  North  American  mammals,  occupying  an 
artificial  landscape  of  rock  and  ravine,  mountains  and 
prairie  and  swamp,  extending  apparently  into  the  indefi- 
nite distance.  Prominent,  of  course,  was  the  mighty 
buffalo,  once  lord  of  the  Kansas  plain.  The  bison  was 
presented  as  in  life  and  death ;  standing  in  defiance,  and 
overcome  by  a  gang  of  snarling  wolves.  Standing  near 
the  former  rangers  of  the  plains  and  mountains,  was  the 
horse,   ''Comanche,"   who,   pierced   with   many  wounds, 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  247 

survived  Custer's  fight  at  the  Little  Big  Horn,  and  passed 
his  last  years  in  honorable  ease  at  Fort  Riley.  After  his 
death,  -which  occurred  in  his  thirty-first  year,  he  was 
mounted  in  the  taxidermic  laboratory  of  the  Kansas  State 
University,  with  the  understanding  that  he  might  be 
shown  at  the  AVorld's  Fair. 

348.  Agricultural  Exhibit. — The  main  agricultural  ex- 
hibition was  made  in  a  special  pavilion  in  the  Agricultural 
Building,  near  the  great  displays  of  North  Dakota  and 
California.  A  remarkably  ornate  style  of  wall  decoration 
was  employed.  Corn,  w^heat,  oats,  all  the  grasses,  and 
the  seeds  thereof,  made  up  innumerable  designs,  and  in 
every  possible  gradation  of  color,  while  the  word  "Kan- 
sas" shone  everywhere  wreathed  in  roses  and  shaped  of 
bold  sunflowers.  The  structure  might  well  have  served 
in  the  old  time  as  the  temple  of  the  goddess  Ceres. 

The  horticultural,  live-stock,  dairy,  forest^  and  mining 
exhibits  were  all  very  creditable.  Rock  salt  was  present 
in  the  mining  exhibit  in  beauty  and  plenty,  and  visitors 
took  away  specimens  with  the  information  that  Kansas 
had  salt  enough  to  supply  the  world  for  a  million  years. 

349.  The  Year  1894. — There  was  much  unrest  among 
the  laboring  classes  during  the  year  of  1894.    Strikes  Avere 

8.  "'The  treeless  and  unwatered  plains  sent  the  biggest  walnut  log  to 
the  World's  Fair,  and  have  a  subterranean  flow  that  is  capable  of  irri- 
gating an  area  more  fertile  and  extensive  than  the  Valley  of  the  Nile. 
The  indescribable  splendor  of  the  palaces  of  the  Exposition,  with  their 
white  domes  and  pinnacles,  and  statues  and  colonnades,  and  terraces  and 
towers,  came  from  the  cement  qiiarries  of  the  Saline  and  the  Smoky  Hill. 
And  this  is  but  the  dawn.  We  stand  in  the  vestibule  of  the  temple.  Much 
less  than  one-half  the  surface  of  the  State  has  been  broken  by  the  plough. 
Its  resources  have  been  imperfectly  explored.  It  has  developed  at  random. 
Science  will  hereafter  reinforce  the  energies  of  nature,  and  the  achieve- 
ments of  the  past  will  pale  into  insignificance  before  the  completed  glory 
of  the  century  to  come." — John  J.  Ingalls. 

4.  Collectors  of  fos.sil  remains  in  Kansas  have  for  years  enriched 
museums   with   valuable   specimens.      Mr.   Charles    H.    Sternberg,    of   Law- 


248  HISTOBY  OF  KANSAS. 

reported,  especially  among  the  coal  miners  and  railroad 
men.  Another  evidence  of  the  popular  discontent  was 
the  marching  of  the  ''Coxey  Army,"  a  crowd  of  unem- 
ployed men  from  the  different  states.  The  army  marched 
to  Washington  to  petition  Congress  and  the  President. 

350.  Oil  and  Gas  Discovery. — The  greatest  discovery 
and  development  in  Kansas,  in  1894,  was  in  the  oil  and 
gas  field.  Nineteen  flowing  wells  were  reported  in  Wilson 
County.  A  Pennsylvania  Company,  exploring  in  that 
region,  stated  that  of  twenty-one  wells  which  they  had 
bored,  but  two  were  valueless.  The  Neodesha  wells  were 
said  to  be  equal  to  those  of  Lima,  Ohio.  Oil  and  gas  were 
struck  at  Sedan,  Thayer,  Cherryvale,  and  other  places, 
but  the  Neodesha  field  remained  the  most  important. 

351.  Educational  Report. — TJie  reports  of  Commis- 
sioner Harris,  of  the  Bureau  of  Education,  showed  that 
Kansas  had  the  greatest  proportional  school  enrollment 
of  any  State  in  the  Union,  the  per  cent  being  87.66.  The 
next  States  in  order  were :  Maine,  87.12 ;  Iowa,  86.33 ; 
South  Dakota,  81.04.  The  per  cent  in  New  York  was 
'70.40.  The  large  proportion  of  the  attendance  to  the 
enrollment  in  .the  schools  of  Kansas  shows  the  interest 
felt  by  the  people  of  the  State  in  education.  Kansas 
received  its  earlier  and  later  settlers  from  the  States  in 
the  Union  in  which  a  system  of  free  public  schools  was 
earliest  established  and  has  been  most  successfully  main- 
tained.   The  common  school  in  Kansas  is  a  heritage  from 

rence,  found  in  1894,  in  the  northeast  part  of  Lane  County,  a  bed  of 
fossils  containing  nearly  the  entire  skeleton  of  the  hairy  mammoth,  similar 
to  that  found  in  Siberia,  and  preserved  in  St.  Petersburg,  a  cast  of  which 
was  exhibited  at  the  World's  Fair.  Over  150  elephants'  teeth,  formed  part 
of  Mr.  Sternberg's  discovery. 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  249 

the  oldest  and  best  educated  communities  of  the  United 
States. 

352.  Death  of  Prominent  Men.— In  the  year  1894  Kan- 
sas parted  with  two  faithful  friends,  guides  and  advisers, 
who  had  both  held  the  helm  of  the  ship  of  State  in  the 
early  part  of  her  voyage.  They  were  Ex-Governors 
Charles  Robinson  and  James  M.  Harvey. 

353.  Election  of  1894.— In  November,  1894,  the  Repub- 
licans succeeded  in  turning  the  tide  which  had  so  strongly 
set  against  them  in  previous  years,  and  elected  Edmund 
N.  Morrill,  Governor.  The  Populists  renominated  Gov- 
ernor Lewelling;  I.  0.  Pickering  led  the  Prohibition 
ticket,  and  David  Overmeyer  the  Democratic  ticket.  At 
this  election  the  constitutional  amendment,  conferring  on 
women  the  full  exercise  of  suffrage,  was  defeated,  the 
vote  standing  95,300  votes  for,  to  130,139  votes  against. 

Eeview  Questions. — Tell  the  story  of  the  Legislative  War. — 
What  magnificent  gift  came  to  the  State  University  during  Lewell- 
ing's  Administration? — What  anniversary  did  the  Columbian  Expo- 
sition celebrate? — What  part  did  Kansas  take  in  the  exposition? — 
What  two  prominent  men  died  during  this  administration? — How  did 
the  Kansas  Educational  Eeport  of  this  term  compare  with  that  of 
other  States? — What  most  significant  item  did  the  report  contain? 


CHAPTER    XXVIII. 


GOVEENOE  MOEEILL'S   ADMINISTEATION. 

1895—1897. 

354.  The  Legislature  of  1895.— The  Legislature  of  1895 
was  Republican  on  joint  ballot,  and  elected  Lucien  Baker, 
of  Leavenworth,  United  States  Senator,  as  the  successor 
of  John  Martin  in  the  ''Lane  line." 

355.  Legislative  Acts. — The  Legislature  did  not  in- 
dulge in  novel  or  excessive  measures.  The  principal  acts 
were  the  establishment  of  appellate 
courts  to  relieve  the  pressure  of  busi- 
ness on  the  Supreme  Court,  and  the 
appropriation  of  $30,000  for  experi- 
ments in  irrigation.  Three  thousand 
dollars  was  also  appropriated  to  buy 
coal  for  destitute  settlers  in  the  west- 
ern portion  of  the  State.  A  concur- 
rent resolution  was  adopted,  asking 
that  the  statue  of  John  Brown  be  Governor  e.  n.  Mormi. 
placed,  as  representing  Kansas,  in  the  Statuary  Hall  of 
the  Capitol  at  Washington.  Congress  refused  to  grant 
the  request. 

356.  Irrigation. — The  State  entered  the  business  of 
irrigation  in  accordance  with  the  Act  of  the  Legislature 
of  1891.    In  June  the  State  irrigation  plant  at  Goodland 

250 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  251 

was  given  a  public  trial.  The  thirteenth  and  last  of  the 
State  plants  was  located  at  Dodge  City  in  July.  The 
Board  of  Irrigation,  appointed  by  the  Legislature,  dur- 
ing its  existence  of  two  years,  instituted  an  extensive 
series  of  experiments,  mostly  in  the  western  portion  of 
the  State,  boring  thirteen  wells  to  different  depths,  and 
testing  various  pumps  and  motive  powers.  The  wells 
were  sunk  at  likely  and  unlikely  places,  in  the  low 
grounds,  on  the  high  plateaus,  and  in  the  sand  hills. 
In  the  County  of  Sherman  150  reservoirs  for  irrigating 
purposes  were  constructed  in  the  year  1895.  Both  north- 
western and  southwestern  Kansas  were  included  in  the 
State's  experiments,  and  a  great  stimulus  was  given  the 
cause  of  irrigation  in  those  sections.  The  search  for  an 
underground  supply  of  water  for  domestic  and  irrigating 
purposes  has  resulted  in  the  discovery  in  central  Kansas 
of  what  seems  a  subterranean  river,  with  a  slow  but 
defined  flow,  and  apparently  exhaustless  in  quantity. 

357.  Natural  Gas  at  lola. — In  the  matter  of  resources 
the  chief  development  in  Kansas  was  that  of  natural  gas, 
the  lola  gas  field  coming  into  line  with  the  Neodesha  oil 
field.  Natural  gas  was  first  discovered  at  lola  in  boring 
for  coal  to  a  great  depth  in  1871.  Fifteen  years  later 
came  the  discovery  of  the  gas  fields  of  Indiana  and  Ohio, 
and  the  grand  results  which  these  states  achieved  in 
building  up  manufacturing  centers  proved  the  incentive 
by  which  the  people  of  lola  were  induced  to  make  efforts 
to  test  the  prospects  shown  in  the  Acers  well. 

Near  the  end  of  1895,  a  great  natural  gas  well  was 
opened.  The  gas  rushed  upward  with  a  roar  as  if  a 
hundred  locomotives  were  letting  off  steam  at  once.    The 


252  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

gas  territory  has  since  developed  over  an  area  of  some 
eighty  square  miles.  Great  flows  have  been  struck  at 
LaHarpe  and  Gas  City.  Twenty-nine  wells  have  been 
drilled,  which  furnish  fuel,  for  zinc  smelters,  many  manu- 
factories, and  fuel  and  light  for  the  city  of  lola. 

When  Thomas  Watson,  the  "middle-of-the-road"  Pop- 
ulist candidate  for  Vice-President,  visited  lola,  in  Sep- 
tember, 1896,  ten  million  cubic  feet  of  gas  were  consumed 
in  honor  of  the  event. 

358.  Weather  Phenomena. — The  year  1895  was  re- 
markable for  the  variability  of  the  Kansas  temperature. 
In  January  the  mercury  was  sixteen  degrees  below  zero ; 
in  February  eighteen  degrees ;  persons  froze  to  death  at 
Newton,  New  Basle  and  Chanute,  and  three  Stanton 
County  children  perished.  On  the  9th  of  May  the  mer- 
cury was  ninety-three  degrees  above  zero,  on  the  12th 
there  were  hard  frosts.  There  was  much  complaint  of 
suffering  and  need  in  the  western  counties.  The  State 
Normal  students  contributed  to  the  relief  of  the  desti- 
tute, and  cities  and  counties  over  the  State  sent  generous 
donations.  The  Eailroad  Commissioners  furnished  10,000 
bushels  of  corn  for  seed,  and  the  State  shipped  in  large 
quantities  of  coal. 

359.  The  Enforcement  of  Law. — The  Prohibitory  Law 
and  the  matter  of  its  enforcement  was  an  absorbing  sub- 
ject in  the  State  in  1895  and  '96.  Loyal  citizens  worked 
most  faithfully  to  secure  effectual  prohibition.    The  courts 

The  State  was  visited  by  severe  cyclones,  costing  several  lives.  The 
most  fatal  in  their  effect  were  those  at  Clifton,  in  April,  and  Seneca,  in 
May.  The  month  of  May  again  seemed  the  month  most  subject  to  these 
storms. 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  253 

served  well.  In  many  places  violators  of  the  law  suf- 
fered very  severe  penalties.  The  sentiment  that  the  law 
can  and  must  be  enforced  extended  generally  over  the 
State. 

360.  Monuments  to    Kansas    Heroes. — On    May    30, 

1895,  Decoration  Day,  a  monument  was  dedicated  in  the 
cemetery  at  Topeka,  to  the  memory  of  the  men  of  the 
Second  Kansas  State  Militia,  Shawnee  County  Regiment, 
who  fell  in  the  battle  of  the  Blue,  in  October,  1864.  The 
remains  of  the  brave  militiamen  were  removed  to  Topeka 
in  1866,  but  the  graves  were  only  slightly  marked.  The 
monument  reared  at  this  time  was  the  gift  of  Mr.  G.  G. 
Gage,  of  Topeka,  who  served  in  the  Second  Regiment  and 
was  taken  prisoner  at  the  Blue.  At  Lawrence  a  monu- 
ment was  dedicated  to  those  slain  in  the  Quantrill  raid. 
At  Frankfort  a  monument  to  the  Union  soldiers  buried 
there  was  unveiled. 

360a.  Death  of  Ex-Governor  Anthony. — Ex-Governor 
George  T.  Anthony  died  at  Topeka,  August  5,  1896.  He 
was  a  man  of  sterling  worth  and  served  Kansas  to  his 
own  honor  and  to  the  State's  best  welfare. 

361.  Daughters    of    the    American    Revolution. — The 

first  Kansas  chapter  of  the  Daughters  of  the  American 
Revolution  was  organized  in  1896.  The  purpose  of  the 
organization  is  "to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  the  spirit 
of  the  men  and  women  who  achieved  American  Inde- 
pendence; 'to  promote  as  an  object  of  primary  impor- 
tance institutions  for  the  development  of  knowledge';  to 
cherish,  maintain  and  extend  the  institutions  of  American 


254  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

freedom;  to  foster  true  patriotism  and  love  of  country, 
and  to  aid  in  securing  for  mankind  all  the  blessings  of 
liberty." 

This  society  has  done  much  in  commemorating  his- 
torical events  in  Kansas.  The  Topeka  chapter  has  placed 
a  tablet  with  suitable  inscription  in  the  sidewalk  in  front 
of  Old  Constitutional  Hall,  where  the  Topeka  constitu- 
tion was  framed.  It  has  also  placed  a  tablet  in  the  walls 
of  the  building,  marking  the  site  of  the  first  log  cabin  in 
Topeka,  and  so  on  through  a  long  list  of  good  deeds. 

362.  Issues  Before  the  People. — The  year  1896  was 
devoted  in  Kansas,  as  in  the  other  states  of  the  Union, 
to  political  discussion  and  action.  The  national  conven- 
tions of  the  great  political  parties  met,  framed  their 
platforms,  and  announced  their  candidates.  The  ques- 
tions before  the  people  being  largely  financial — the  "gold 
standard"  as  opposed  to  "free  silver,"  and  "free  trade" 
as  against  "protection" — there  was  endless  opportunity 
for  discussion.  In  Kansas,  the  canvass,  one  of  the  most 
thorough  and  earnest  ever  made  in  the  history  of  the 
State,  was  conducted  principally  by  "home  talent." 

363.  The  Election  of  1896.— The  political  combinations 
during  the  summer  resulted  in  the  fusion  of  the  Demo- 
cratic and  People's  parties,  and  Kansas  cast  her  electoral 
vote  for  Bryan  and  Sewall.  The  Populist  State  and  Con- 
gressional tickets  were  triumphant.  John  W.  Leedy  was 
elected  Governor.  The  Republican  candidate  for  re-elec- 
tion was  Governor  E.  N.  Morrill.  Wm.  McKinley  was 
elected  President  of  the  United  States  on  the  National 
Republican  ticket. 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  255 

Eeview  Questions. — Why  did  Congress  refuse  to  place  the 
statue  of  John  Brown  in  Statuary  Hall? — Would  you  be  glad  to 
have  it  there? — How  did  the  Legislature  of  1895  show  its  sympathy 
for  the  Western  sufferers? — Tell  of  the  work  of  irrigation  in  Kansas. 
— What  great  natural  resource  was  discovered  during  this  administra- 
tion?— How  is  the  prohibitory  law  serving  as  time  goes  on? — What 
prominent  man  died  during  this  administration? — How  have  the 
Daughters  of  the  American  Eevolution  served  the  State? — What  were 
the  issues  before  the  people  in  the  campaign  of  1896? 


CHAPTER    XXIX. 

GOVEKNOR  LEEDY'S  ADMINISTRATION. 

1897—1899. 

364.  The  Legislature  of  1897. — The  Legislative  session 
of  1897  lasted  sixty-seven  days,  being  the  longest  on 
record  in  Kansas.  January  26,  the  joint  session  of  the 
Legislature  elected  Wm.  A.  Harris 
United  States  Senator.  Mr.  Harris 
had  previously  served  in  the  House 
of  Representatives.  A  bill  for  a  uni- 
form system  of  text-books  in  public 
schools  was  made  a  law.  The  29th 
of  January  was,  in  1897,  formally  ob- 
served by  both  branches  of  the  Leg- 
islature as  "Kansas  Dav."  ^  x  ^    rrr 

Governor  John  W. 

365.  Text-Boox   Commission.— For  ^^^y- 

the  purpose  of  carrying  out  the  provisions  of  the  Text- 
Book  Law  there  was  created  a  School  Text-Book  Com- 
mission, consisting  of  eight  members,  appointed  by  the 
Governor  by  and  with  the  consent  of  the  Senate,  not 
more  than  three  of  whom  should  be  selected  from  any 
one  political  party.  The  State  Superintendent  of  Public 
Instruction  was  made  chairman  ox-officio. 

366.  Agricultural  Conditions. — The  carefully  collated 
and  very  conservative  statistics  collected  by  the  Secre- 
tary of  the  State  Board  of  Agriculture,  showed  that  the 
farm  products  of  Kansas  for  the  years  1897-98  amounted] 

256 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  .  257 

in  value  to  $288,259,056 ;  which  was  a  gain  of  $43,506,301, 
or  nearly  eighteen  per  cent  over  the  preceding  biennial 
period.  The  reports  show  an  increase  in  the  value  of 
farm  products  in  Kansas  for  every  biennial  period  from 
1877-78  forward,  except  for  1885-86,  and  1893-94.  In 
other  words,  there  were  four  unproductive  years  in 
twenty-one.  With  1897  came  increased  signs  of  pros- 
perity, following  a  period  of  depression.  It  was  estimated 
that  Kansas  raised,  in  1897,  enough  wheat  for  every  man, 
woman  and  child  in  the  State ;  to  provide  seed  for  the 
coming  year,  and  to  feed  all  of  New  England,  New  York,^ 
and  Pennsylvania  for  twelve  months. 

367.  Mineral  Products.— In  April,  1897,  a  great  oil 
refinery  was  built  at  Neodesha,  and  eighty-seven  wells 
produced  daily  an  average  of  four  barrels  of  oil  each. 
The  stock  of  oil  accumulated  at  Neodesha  before  the 
opening  of  the  new  refinery  amounted  to  over  300,000 
barrels.  Oil  was  piped  from  Neodesha  to  Chanute.  Kan- 
sans  began  to  buy,  in  quantity,  Kansas  oil.  lola,  Coffey- 
ville,  Independence,  Cherryvale,  Paola,  Neodesha,  Osa- 
watomie,  and  Chanute  were  noted  as  producers  of  natural 
gas. 

Kansas  was  rated  as  the  eighth  State  in  the  Union  in 
the  number  of  men  employed  in  coal  mining.  The  salt- 
producing  capacity  at  Hutchinson  was  increased  to  over 
1,650,000  barrels  per  annum. 

368.  Sons  of  the  Revolution.— In  February,  1897,  the 
first  Kansas  chapter  of  the  Sons  of  the  Revolution  was 
organized.  The  patriotic  societies  having  an  historical 
origin  find  a  fertile  soil  in  Kansas.  The  population 
is   largely   American,    and   a    great   number   of  families 


258  '  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

trace  their  lineage  to  a  Revolutionary,  and  even  Colonial, 
ancestry. 

THE  SPANISH-AMEEICAN  WAE. 
DEWEY. 

O  Dewey  was  the  moi-ning 

Upon  the  first  of  May  ; 
And  Dewey  was  the  admiral 
^  Down  in  Manila  bay  ; 

And  Dewey  were  the  Regent's  eyes, 

"Them  orbs"  of  Royal  Blue  : 
And  Dewey  feel  discouraged? 

I  Dew  not  think  we  Dew. 

Written  by  Eugene  Ware  upon  hearing  of  Admiral  Dewey's  victory  over 
the  Spanish  fleet  at  Manila. 

369.  Kansas  Patriotism. — In  Kansas,  peaceful  and 
prosperous  during  the  year  1898,  the  thought  of  the  peo- 
ple was  yet  of  war — the  war  with  Spain.  The  event 
which  created  the  most  enthusiasm  was  the  victory  of 
Admiral  Dewey  at  Manila,  on  the  1st  of  May,  1898.  Kan- 
sas never  before  saw  so  many  American  flags  unfurled 
as  m  honor  of  the  triumph  of  the  American  navy. 

370.  Colonel  Fred  Funston  and  Cuba. — Kansas  people 
sympathized  from  the  first  with  the  Cubans  in  their  strug- 
gle against  the  tyranny  of  Spain,  and  their  knowledge 
of  the  situation  was  increased  by  the  arrival  from  Cuba, 
in  January,  1898,  of  Colonel  Fred.  Funston,  a  Kansas 
boy,  a  former  student  of  the  State  University,  with  home 
and  friends  in  Kansas.  After  a  service  of  two  years  in 
the  insurgent  army  in  Cuba,  he  returned  to  his  native 
State  and  spoke  in  many  places  on  the  incidents  and  the 
lessons  of  the  Cuban  w^ar  for  freedom.  The  people  of 
Kansas  were  deeply  moved  by  the  sufferings  of  the  hap- 
less Cuban  non-combatants,  by  the  starving  to  death  of 
150,000  people,  and  by  the  evident  determination  of  the 
Spanish  to  exterminate  the  Cuban  race. 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  269 

371.  The  Destruction  of  the  Maine. — The  treacherous 
destruction  of  the  Maine,  in  the  harbor  of  Havana,  on 
February  15,  1898,  stirred  the  indignation  of  the  citizens 
of  Kansas,  as  it  did  of  all  loyal  Americans.^  They  waited, 
however,  the  result  of  the  investigation,  and  in  the  mean- 
time were  generous  participators  in  the  effort  to  relieve 
the  starving  Cubans,  especially  at  Mantanzas. 

372.  Succession  of  Events. — The  succession  of  events 
was  watched  with  the  most  intense  interest;  the  passage 
of  the  emergency  bill,  appropriating  $50,000,000  for  the 
defense  of  the  United  States ;  the  message  of  President 
MpKinley,  with  the  Maine  report;  the  President's  mes- 
sage recommending  the  intervention  of  the  L^nited  States 
the  passage  by  Congress  of  the  intervention  resolutions 
the  submission  of  the  President's  ultimatum  to  Spain 
the  beginning  of  the  war  by  the  act  of  Spain  in  breaking 
off  diplomatic  relations  with  us.     Kansas,  in  every  step 
for  the  protection  of  the  honor  of  the  United  States,  stood 
by  the  Government. 

373.  Volunteers.— The  President's  call  for  125,000  men 
was  issued  on  the  23d  of  April.  But  Kansas  had  not 
waited  for  the  call.  On  the  18th  of  April  a  company  of 
eighty  men  marched  to  the  office  of  Governor  Leedy  and 
offered  their  services  for  the  war.-  The  Governor  prom- 
ised to  accept  their  service's  on  the  first  call.  A  tender 
was  also  made  Secretary-of-War  Alger  by  General  Charles 
McCrum,  of  the  Kansas  National  Guards,  for  any  needed 
service  at  any  time. 

1.  The  American  battleship  Maine,  at  anchor  in  Havana  harbor,  where 
it  had  heen  sent  on  a  peaceful  mission  and  for  the  protection  of  American 
interests,  was  blown  np.  it  is  believed,  by  a  Spanish  mine,  February  15, 
1898.     Two  officers  and  264  of  the  crew  were  killed  or  drowned. 

2.  When  the  call  for  volunteers  came  to  Emporia  the  quota  assigned 
to  her  was  filled  within  four  hours. 


260  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

The  quota  of  Kansas  when  the  call  came  was  announced 
as  2,230  men.  Governor  Leedy  summoned  to  his  aid 
Colonel  Fred.  Funston,  probably  the  only  man  in  Kansas 
who  had  seen  military  service  in  Cuba,  and  the  work  of 
recruiting  three  regiments  of  volunteer  infantry  began 
at  once.^ 

374.  Patriotism  of  Kansas  University  and  State  Nor- 
mal.— The  desire  to  enlist  ran  high  among  the  young  men 
of  Kansas,  and  was  manifested  in  the  higher  educational 
institutions.  The  council  of  the  State  University  felt 
impelled  to  issue  a  circular,  advising  students  to  weigh 
the  question  well  before  enlisting,  but  stating  that  if  they 
heard  the  voice  of  honor  and  their  country's  call,  the 
benediction  of  their  alma  mater  would  be  upon  them. 
Members  of  the  senior  class  enlisting  were  granted  their 
diplomas  without  waiting  for  graduation.  The  State 
Normal  School  extended  the  same  courtesy  to  its  soldier- 
students. 

375.  Camp  Leedy. — It  was  soon  announced  that  in 
Kansas  the  policy  adopted  in  some  of  the  States,  of  en- 
listing the  National  Guard  organizations  into  the  volun- 
teer service,  would  not  be  followed,  but  that  the  regi- 
ments would  be  raised  without  regard  to  existing  militia 
organizations.  Kecruiting  offices  were  established  at  vari- 
ous points  in  the  State,  and  after  enrollment,  companies 
went  into  quarters  at,  Camp  Leedy,  the  State  camp  near 
Topeka,  where  the  men  were  re-examined  and  mustered 
into  the  service  of  the  United  States.  By  the  5th  of  May 
two  regiments  were  quartered  at  Camp  Leedy. 

3.  It  is  recorded  that  of  the  three  white  regiments  recruited  at  Topeka, 
every  volunteer  signed  his  name  himself  in  this  list.  This  speaks  well 
for  the  education  of  the  Kansas  people. 


POLITICAL  CHANGES. 


261 


376.    Joseph  K.   Hudson,  Brigadier-GeneraL — On  the 

27th  of  May,  Major  Joseph  K.  Hudson,  who  had  won  his 
title  in  the  old  Tenth  Kansas  and  the  Sixty-second  United 
States  Volunteers,  was  nominated  as 
a  Brigadier-General  from  Kansas. 

377.  The  Regiments.— It  was  de- 
cided that  in  numbering  the  regi- 
ments, allowance  would  be  made  for 
the  seventeen  regiments  that  Kansas 
raised  in  the  Civil  War,  and  for  the 
two  recruited  afterwards  to  fight  the 
Indians.  Accordingly,  the  first  Kan- 
Generai  J.  K.  Hudson,  g^s  regiment  enrolled  in  the  war 
against  Spain  was  numbered  the  Twentieth,  a  number 
that  came  to  be  heard  of  on  both  sides  of  the  world.  The 
Twentieth  Kansas  Volunteers  was  made  up  of  twelve 
companies  under  command  of  Colonel  Frederick  Funston. 
The  companies  composing  the  Twenty-first  Regiment  were 
mustered  on  the  14th  of  May,  with  Colonel  Thomas  G. 
Fitch,  commanding.  The  Twenty-second  Regiment  was 
mustered  on  the  17th  of  May,  with  Colonel  Henry  C. 
Lindsey  commanding. 

378.  To  the  Field.— On  the  16th  of  May,  1898,  the 
Twentieth  Regiment  broke  camp  at  Topeka,  and  left  for 
San  Francisco,  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Little,  Colonel  Funston  having  been  called  for  a  time  to 
Washington.  The  Twenty-first  was  the  next  to  leave, 
journeying  to  the  great  camp  on  the  old  field  of  Chicka- 
mauga,  and  after  a  brief  interval,  on  the  25th  of  May, 
the  Twenty-second  left  Camp  Leedy  for  Camp  Alger, 
near  Falls  Church,  Va.    Thus,  by  the  1st  of  June,  Kansas 


262  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

had   three  regiments  mustered  into  the  service   of  the 
United  States,  and  in  camps  of  instruction. 

379.  At  the  Camps.— The  Twenty-first  and  Twenty- 
second  found  themselves  camped  in  historic  localities. 
"Camp  Alger"  was  situated  on  the  old  plantation  of  Lord 
Fairfax,  with  which  Washington  was  familiar  when  a 
young  soldier,  and  Camp  Thomas  on  the  bloody  field  of 
Chickamauga  in  the  old  war.  During  the  summer,  re- 
cruiting officers  visited  Kansas  on  behalf  of  the  Kansas 
regiments.  In  one  day  100  men  left  Lawrence  to  join  the 
Twentieth. 

380.  Colored  Troops. — On  the  21st  of  June,  Governor 
Leedy  announced  his  intention  of  raising  two  battalions 
of  colored  troops,  under  the  President's  call  for  25,000 
men.  In  the  face  of  many  predictions  of  its  impossi- 
bility, the  enlistn^ent  of  colored  soldiers  proceeded.  By 
the  4th  of  July  there  were  400  men  at  Camp  Leedy;  two 
days  later  there  were  550  men.  Governor  Leedy  tele- 
graphed the  War  Department  that  two  battlions  were 
ready,  and  asked  permission  to  raise  a  third.  He  was 
informed  that  the  volunteers  under  the  President's  call 
had  been  entirely  apportioned.  Lieutenant-Colonel  James 
M.  Beck  commanded  this  regiment.  It  was  organized  as 
the  Twenty-third. 

381.  The  Twenty-third  to  Santiago. — The  colored  regi- 
ment, the  Twenty-third,  was  the  first  to  leave  the  soil 
of  the  United  States.  The  regiment  left  Topeka  August 
22,  1898,  went  directly  to  New  York,  and  sailed  on  the 
Vigilencia  for  Santiago,  arriving  there  850  strong,  in  time 
to  see  the  embarkation  of  the  last  of  the  Spanish  troops 
for  Spain.     Within  twenty-four  hours  the  Twenty-third 


POLITICAL  CHANGES.  263 

was  loaded  on  a  railroad  train  and  transported  to  San 
Luis,  an  old  Cuban  town,  where  is  was  destined  to  remain 
until  its  return  to  the  United  States. 

382.  The  Twentieth  Kansas  to  the  Philippines. — The 
Twentieth  Kansas  Regiment  sailed  from  San  Francisco, 
Colonel  Funston  commanding,  on  the  steamship  ''Indi- 
ana," October  27,  and  on  the  "Newport,"  November  9, 
1898.*  The  ships  arrived  in  Manila  in  the  early  days  of 
December. 

383.  The  Home  Coming.— "With  the  middle  of  August 
came  the  signing  of  the  protocol  and  the  evident  end  of 
the  war  with  Spain.^  As  the  foe  had  disappeared,  many 
of  the  enlisted  men  felt  that  their  mission  was  completed. 
The  first  regiment  to  arrive  at  Fort  Leavenworth  was 
the  Twenty-second,  from  Camp  Meade,  Middletown,  Penn- 
sylvania. They  were  mustered  out  November  3,  1898. 
The  Twenty-first  Regiment  was  mustered  out  December 
10,  1898.  The  Twenty-third  returned  from  Cuba  and  was 
mustered  out  April  10,  1899.  While  these  regiments  had 
done'  no  actual  fighting  in  the  field,  they  had  waited  pa- 
tiently in  camp,  had  drilled  in  preparation  and  were 
ready,  should  their  country  call,  to  sacrifice  their  lives. 

By  the  terms  of  the  enlistment  the  members  of  the 
Twentieth  were  entitled  to  their  discharge  papers  when 
the  treaty  of  peace  was  signed  between  the  United  States 

4.  On  the  8th  of  November,  1898,  the  Twentieth  Kansas  soldiers  on 
board  the  Indiana  went  ashore  at  Honolulu  and  cast  their  votes  in  the 
National  election.  At  San  Francisco  on  the  same  day,  the  men  of  the 
First  Battalion  went  to  the  polls  immediately  after  going  on  board  the 
Newport,  and  the  day  following,  in  company  with  the  Wyoming  Light 
Battery,  set   sail   across  the  wide  Pacific. 

5.  On  January  4,  1899,  the  definite  treaty  of  peace  between  Spain 
and  the  United  States,  signed  in  I'aris,  December  10,  1898,  was  trans- 
mitted to  the  Senate  by  President  McKinley,  and  on  February  6  was 
formally  ratified. 


2M  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

and  Spain,  February  6,  1899.  At  that  time,  however, 
conditions  were  very  serious  in  the  Philippines  on  ac- 
count of  the  insurgent  uprising,  and  the  Kansas  boys, 
filled  with  patriotism  and  love  of  country,  waived  their 
rights,  and  notified  the  War  Department  that  they  would 
remain  in  the  field. 

384.  Election  of  1898.— At  the  election  of  1898  William 
E.  Stanley  was  the  candidate  of  the  Republican  Party 
for  Governor.  John  W.  Leedy  was  the  candidate  of  the 
United  Democrat  and  Populist  Parties.  W.  E.^  Stanley 
was  elected. 

385.  Special  Session  of  the  Legislature. — The  close  of 
the  year  1898,  and  the  opening  of  1899,  found  a  special 
session  of  the  Legislature  assembled,  which  had  been 
convened  by  Governor  Leedy  on  December  21,  1898,  to 
adopt  legislation  regulating  railroad  companies,  and  for 
other  purposes.  There  was  some  discussion  in  regard  to 
the  validity  of  this  special  session,  which  was,  however, 
established  by  the  State  Supreme  Court  in  the  following 
February. 

Review  Questions. — What  important  school  legislation  was 
enacted  by  the  Legislature  of  1897? — What  is  the  work  of  the  State 
Text  Book  Commission? — How  many  members  compose  it? — Note  the 
progress  of  the  oil  industry. — What  were  the  principal  causes  of  the 
Spanish-American  War? — How  did  Kansas  respond  to  the  call  for 
volunteers? — Where  were  Camp  Leedy,  Camp  Alger  and  Camp 
Thomas? — What  regiments  were  organized  in  Kansas,  and  where  did 
they  serve? — How  did  the  Twentieth  show  its  patriotism  at  the  close 
of  the  term  for  which  it  had  volunteered? 


INDUSTRIAL  DEVELOPMENT. 

CHAPTER    XXX. 

GOVEENOR  STANLEY'S  ADMINISTRATION. 

1899—1903. 

386.  The  Legislature  of  1899.— The  principal  public 
acts  of  this  Legislature  were  those  providing  for  a  tax 
levy  sufficient  to  complete  the  State  House,  which  had 
been  thirty-three  years  in  construction,  and  to  build  a 
third  State  Insane  Asylum.  A  large  appropriation  was 
made  to  purchase  a  binding-twine  plant  for  the  State 
Penitentiary. 

WAR  IN  THE  PHILIPPINES. 

387.  The   Twentieth  in  the    Philippines.— After    the 

treaty  of  peace  with  Spain,  and  after  President  McKinley 
had  declared  that  the  United  States  was  sovereign  in  the 
Philippines,  Filipino  insurgents,  led 
by  Aguinaldo,  endeavored  to  disrupt 
that  sovereignty  and  secure  control 
Iftt^     I.  of  the  islands  themselves.     Hostilities 

%^        *"*  began   February  4,   1899,   at   Manila. 

fP^  The  Twentieth  Kansas,  led  by  Colonel 

^^mk         ^  Funston,  took  an  active  part  in  the 

^Br  ~-  campaigns   that  followed,    beginning 

in  the  defense  of  Manila  and  closing: 


Governor    William    E.        TitItt    1  i 
Stanley.  «JUiy    1. 


1.  One  night  in  camp  the  Twentieth  Kansas  lay  weary  and  discouraged 
and  homesick,  when  some  one  called  out  the  old  University  war-cry, 
"Rock.  Chalk.  .Jayhawk.  K.  T'."  It  was  taken  up  by  others  and  sounded 
over  the  camp,  a  welcome  home-word,  like  the  taste  of  home  food  or  the 
sight  of  home  faces. 

265 


266 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


388.  Caloocan. — On  the  road  to  Caloocan,  Lieutenant 
Alford,  one  of  the  Kansas  University  boys,  and  the  brav- 
est of  the  brave,  lost  his  life  while  leading"  his  company 
in  a  skirmish  against  Filipino  sharp- 
shooters. The  order  had  been  given 
to  charge,  and  the  Kansans  advanced 
rapidly,  falling  to  fire,  rising  and 
charging,  until  they  came  to  a  hand- 
to-hand  conflict  with  the  enemy.  The 
fight  centered  about  a  battle  flag, 
which  the  insurgents  were  defending 
with  their  lives. ^  At  last  the  Filipinos 
were  scattered,  and  the  men  were  General  Fred.  Funston. 
ordered  back  to  the  line.  They  came  amid  the  cheers  of 
the  army,  proudly  bearing  the  captured  colors,^  but  with 
sad  hearts  on  account  of  the  loss  of  their  gallant  com- 
mander. The  Kansas  regiment  was  the 
first  to  enter  Caloocan.  General  Mac- 
Arthur  wired  this  message  to  General 
Otis,  "Caloocan  taken.  Kansans  a  mile 
ahead  of  the  line.  Will  stop  them  if 
lean." 

389.  Calumpit. — The  Filipino  army 
had  concentrated  at  Calumpit*  and 
were  behind  trenches  that  have  rarely 
been  excelled.  The  Twentieth  and  the' 
First  Montana  were  ordered  to  attack 


Lieutenant    Alford. 


2.  During  the  days  of  almost  continual  fighting,  the  regiment  lost 
three  commissioned  ofl!icers — Captain  David  G.  Elliot,  Lieutenant  Alfred  C. 
Alford.  and  Second  Lieutenant  William  McTaggart. 

.3.     The  captured  colors  are  in   the  Kansas   State  Historical  rooms. 

4.  Calumpit  was  the  most  strongly  fortified  place  of  the  insurgents. 
It  was  surrounded  on  three  sides  by  rivers,  the  Rio  Grande,  the  Calumpit 
and  the  Bagbag,  and  was  fortified  on  the  fourth  side. 


INDUSTEIAL  DEVELOPMENT.  267 

the  force  of  insurgents  there.  Between  the  two  armies 
flowed  the  broad,  unf ordable  Rio  Grande  River.  A  partly 
dismantled  railroad  bridge  crossed  the  river,  guarded  on 
the  Filipino  side  by  three  pieces  of  artillery  and  a  rapid- 
firing  Maxim.  To  endeavor  to  cross  the  bridge  was  im- 
practicable. 

Colonel  Funston's  plan  was  to  effect  a  crossing  farther 
down  the  river.  This  was  made  possible  by  Privates 
White  and  Trembly,  who  swam  the  river  with  a  rope 
and  tied  it  to  a  post  on  the  Filipino  fortifications.  Bam- 
boo rafts  were  carried  to  the  water's  edge  and  Colonel 
Funston,  in  face  of  the  enemy's  fire,  made  the  first  voyage 
across  the  river,  the  men  pulling  the  raft  over  by  means 
of  the  rope.  Others  followed,  and  attacking  the  Fili- 
pinos in  the  rear,  they  drove  them  out  of  their  trenches.^ 
When  the  defense  guarding  the  bridge  had  been  cap- 
tured,® it  too  was  used.  Soon  the  entire  force  was  over 
and  the  place  captured.'^ 

390.     The   Report   of   Secretary-of-War   Root.«— "The 

The  miles  of  defense  at  Calumpit  were  made  of  wickerwork  and  filled 
with  the  earth  that  had  been  taken  from  the  trenches.  In  many  places 
they  were  covered  with  boiler  and  railroad  iron  and  were  so  thick  that 
artillery  hardly  effected  them.  At  regular  distances  there  were  portholes 
from  which  the  ocdapants  could  fire  without  being  hit.  Leading  from  the 
trenches  back  to  other  lines  of  intrenchments  were  zigzag  ditches,  which 
the  Kansans  called  get-aways.  These  enormous  fortifications  had  been 
made  by  unarmed  Filipinos  and  hundreds  of  Chinese  impressed  into  the 
service.  The  insurgents,  afraid  to  put  their  heads  above  the  parapets, 
fired  largely  at  random. 

5.  Resell  Manahan,  age  seventeen,  a  high  school  boy  from  Topeka,  fell 
in  the  battle  of  Calumpit,  April  26.  1899.  On  the  night  before  the  battle 
he  had  taken  out  his  Bible,  carried  with  him  from  home,  and  read  the 
91st  Psalm.  A  bronze  tablet  in  the  stairway  wail  of  the  Topeka  High 
School  building  commemorates  his  loyalty  and  patriotism. 

6.  The  Twentieth  Kansas  had  a  most  remarkable  record  in  the  matter 
of  desertions.     Of  the  1,.300  who  enlisted,  only  four  deserted. 

7.  The  loss  by  death  from  all  causes  during  the  term  of  service  of  the 
four  Kansas  regiments  aggregates  117. 

8.  Major-Oeneral  MacArthur  recommended  that  the  following  Kansans  be 
given  medals  of  honor  for  special  gallantry  :  Lieutenant  Edward  J.  Hardy, 
Chief  Trumpeter  Charles  P.  Barshfieid,  Corporal  Waiter  S.  Drysdaie, 
Privates  Huntsman  and  Willey.  Lieutenant  Colin  H.  Rail,  Sergeant  Ray- 
mond S.  Enslow,  and  Privates  White  and  W.  B.  Trembly. 


268 


HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 


character  of  the  regiment's  services  in  the  field  is  well 
indicated  by  the  following  recommendations  for  brevet 
promotions  made  by  Major-General  Arthur  MacArthur, 
commanding  the  second  division  of  the  Eighth  Army 
Corps,  and  approved  by  Major-General  Elwell  S.  Otis, 
commanding  the  Corps.  I  quote  from  the  official  docu- 
ment : 

''  'Frederick  Funston,  Brigadier-General,  U.  S.  Vols.,  to  be  Major- 
General,  U.  S.  Vols.,  by  brevet.  (For)  Gallant  and  meritorious  serv- 
ices throughout  the  campaign  against  Filipino  insurgents  from  Feb- 
ruary 4  to  July  1,  1899;  particularly  for  daring  courage  at  the 
passage  of  the  Rio  Grande  de  la  Pampanga,  May  27,  1899,  while 
Colonel  20th  Kansas  Vols. 

''  'Wilder  S.  Metcalf,  Colonel,  20th  Kansas  Vols.,  to  be  Brigadier- 
General,  by  brevet.  (For)  Gallant  and  meritorious  services  through- 
out the  campaign  against  Filipino  insurgents,  from  February  4  to 
July  1,  1899,  during  which  period  he  was  wounded  on  two  separate 
occasions. ' 

"The  officers  and  enlisted  men  of 
the  regiment  exhibited  the  same  high 
quality  of  bravery  and  efficiency 
which  characterized  their  command- 
ers. 

"I  beg  to  join  with  the  people  of 
Kansas  in  welcoming  to  their  homes 
these  citizen-soldiers,  so  worthy  of 
the  heroic  origin  and  patriotic  his- 
tory of  their  state. 

"Elihu  Root." 
391.     The  Home-Coming  of  the  Twentieth.— The  regi- 
ment embarked  on  the  United  States  transport,  Tartar, 
on  the  second  day  of  September,   1899,  and  sailed  out 
of  Manila  Bay  on  the  following  afternoon.     When 


General  W.   S.   Metcalf. 


on 


the  evening  of  October  10,  the  transport  was  sighted  off 


INDUSTEIAL  DEVELOPMENT.  269 

Golden  Gate,  San  Francisco,  tugs  bearing  Governor  Stan- 
ley and  other  distinguished  Kansans,  and  many  news- 
paper correspondents,  hastened  to  greet  the  returning 
heroes.^  On  the  3d  of  November,  at  Topeka,  a  reception 
was  tendered  to  the  members  of  the  regiment  by  the  citi- 
zens of  Kansas,  who  came  in  great  crowds  from  all  parts 
of  the  State  to  do  honor  to  the  brave  ''Twentieth  boys," 
who  had  added  another  brilliant  page  to  the  annals  of 
Kansas. 


9.  It  was  at  the  time  when  cheers  from  a  thousand  throats  were 
conveying  glad  welcome  that  a  pathetic  incident  occurred  which  cast  a 
gloom  over  the  happy  occasion.  William  A.  Snow,  a  newspaper  corre- 
spondent, and  son  of  Chancellor  Snow  of  Kansas  University,  was  swept 
overboard  from  the  decli  of  the  newspaper  boat  and  drowned. 


270  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

392.     A  Letter  from  President  McKinley. 

EXECUTIVE     MANSION. 

WASHINGTON, 


^a^. 


INDUSTEIAL  DEVELOPMENT.  271 

393.  Period  of  Prosperity.— The  late  summer  of  1899 
found  the  State  in  peace.  The  political  contests,  which 
had  been  sharp  and  severe  for  some  years,  and  marked 
with  mutations  of  fortune,  had  taught  Kansas  people 
that  the  State  was  safe  in  the  hands  of  its  honest  citizens, 
without  regard  to  their  party  designations.  An  era  of 
good  feeling  prevailed.  The  losses  sustained  in  the  col- 
lapse following  the  boom  of  1887  had  been  largely  made 
up.  A  singular  feature  of  the  recovery  in  the  "boom 
towns,"  which,  in  their  speculative  days,  had  scattered 
their  houses  over  a  great  area,  was  their  practical  con- 
solidation. Houses  which  had  stood  in  empty  desolation 
in  the  midst  of  boundless  "additions,"  were  removed 
nearer  to  the  actual  center  of  population,  renovated  and 
repaired,  and  became  again  places  of  business  and  the 
homes  of  men. 

'  The  discharge  of  the  heavy  public  and  private  indebt- 
edness of  Kansas  was  going  on  at  a  rate  that  surprised 
financial  authorities,  but  the  explanation  was  found  in 
the  great  natural  resources  of  the  State.  When  asked 
how  Kansas  in  seven  years  paid  off  more  than  $100,- 
000,000  of  debt,  it  was  answered  that,  in  those  seven 
years,  Kansas  produced  four  billion  dollars'  worth  of 
farm  products  and  live  stock. 

394.  Visit  of  Theodore  Roosevelt. — Theodore  Roose- 
velt, candidate  for  Vice-President,  visited  the  State  in 
1900,  making  addresses  in  several  cities.  A  right  royal 
reception  was  extended  by  the  citizens  of  Kansas  to  the 
illustrious  hero  of  San  Juan. 

395.  The  Election  of  1900.— In  the  State  election  of 


272 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


1900  Governor  Stanley  was  re-elected.  In  the  national 
election  President  McKinley  was  re-elected  President  of 
the  United  States. 

396.  The    Legislature    of   1901.— The   Legislature    of 

1901  elected  J.  R.  Burton  United  States  Senator.  The 
Biennial  Election  Law  was  passed  providing  that  all 
county  officers,  excepting  Commissioners,  be  elected  every 
two  years,  the  first  election  to  be  in  1902.  An  act  was 
passed  providing  for  the  voluntary  consolidation  of 
school  districts  for  the  purpose  of  forming  graded  schools 
in  the  country.  The  "Western  Branch  of  the  State  Nor- 
mal was  located  at  Hays,  and  $75,000  was  appropriated 
for  the  purpose  of  a  State  display  at  the  Louisiana  Pur- 
chase Exposition  at  St.  Louis.  A  provision  was  made 
for  the  purchase  of  an  executive  residence  at  a  cost  of 
$30,000. 

397.  Traveling  Libraries.— The  Legislature  of  1901 
granted  an  appropriation  of  $2,000  a  year  for  two  years 
to  aid  in  the  work  of  the  Traveling  Libraries,  and  pro- 
vided for  the  appointment  of  a  Com- 
mission of  three  persons,  who,  to- 
gether with  the  State  Librarian  and 
president  of  the  Kansas  Federation 
of  Clubs,  have  the  management  of  the 
Traveling  Library  Department  of  the 
State  Library.  Under  the  provisions 
of  the  Act,  the  libraries,  averaging 
fifty  books  in  number,  are  loaned  by 

Mrs.  Harriet  Cashing,  the  State  Library  to  the  communities, 
neighborhoods,  and  organizations  applying  for  them  and, 
when  read,  are  returned  to  be  again  sent  out.     A  large 


INDUSTEIAL  DEVELOPMENT. 


273 


number   of  books   have   been   given   to   the   Library   by 
w^omen's    clubs    and    by    individuals. 
The  Kansas  Federation  of  Clubs  ori- 
ginated the  plan  for  the  distribution 
of  good  literature. 

398.  The  Federation. — Kansas  is 
indebted  to  the  Federation  of  Wom- 
en's Clubs  for  the  Traveling  Library. 
This  society  w^as  the  outgrov^th  of  the 
Social  Science  Club  organized  at 
Leavenworth  in  May,  1881,  upon  the  ^^'^-  ^^^'^  '^-  ^'^^'■ 
suggestion  of  Mrs.  Harriet  Cushing  and  Mrs.  Mary  T. 
Gray.^^  The  Federation,  v^hich  now^  consists  of  about 
400  clubs,  has,  from  the  first,  been  a  powder  for  good.  It 
has  been  instrumental  in  bringing  to  pass  many  measures 
for  the  elevation  of  v^omen  and  for  the  welfare  and  im- 
provement of  the  state. ^^ 

399.  Election  of  1902.— Willis  Joshua  Bailey,  Repub- 

10.  Coming  to  Kansas  and  to  Wyandotte  as  a  bride  upon  the  day  the 
Constitutional  Convention  met,  Mrs.  Mary  T,  Gray  became  at  once  inter- 
ested in  the  existing  conditions,  and  a  potent  factor  in  the  life  of  this 
State  of  her  choice.  While  she  had  chosen  to  exchange  a  life  of  ease  for 
one  of  many  privations  incident  to  pioneer  life,  her  innate  retinement 
and  culture  created  around  her  an  atmosphere  ennobling  and  uplifting. 
Herself  finely  educated,  it  was  her  earnest  desire  to  promote  the  mental 
progress  of  women,  and  she  was  among  the  first  to  advocate  the  forma- 
tion of  a  State  club  where  women  might  meet  to  discuss  all  that  goes 
to  make  womanhood  deeper  and  sweeter.  Many  timid  women  blossomed 
into  a  life  of  helpfulness  under  the  radiance  of  her  kindly  sympathy.  Her 
life  was  the  exemplification  of  a  rich  mental  culture  which  ripened  with 
the  passing  of  the  allotted  three-score  years  and  ten,  even  until  the  day 
of  her  home-going,  October  10,  1904,  in  Kansas  City,  Kansas. 

11.  The  original  idea  and  scheme  of  the  Traveling  Libraries  Commis- 
sion was  to  provide  books  for  the  bookless.  This  has  been  done,  and 
more.  A  great  sweep  of  library  spirit  has  been  created  in  Kansas  through 
the  little  traveling  libraries.  In  many  of  the  smaller  public  libraries  a 
case  or  two  of  the  State's  books  are  kept  to  stimulate  the  interest  of  the 
patrons  ;  the  schools  and  clubs  use  them  ;  the  ranchman,  miles  from  books 
of  any  description,  sends  for  a  library,  and  his  neighbors  read  the  books 
with  him.  Orders  are  received  from  groups  of  men  and  women  living  in 
localities  remote  from  railroads  and  having  no  other  facilities  for  reading. 
In  1004  there  were  15,080  books  and  300  cases  in  possession  of  the 
Commission. 


274  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

lican,  was  elected  Governor  of  the  State.     W.  H.  Crad- 
dock  was  the  Democratic  nominee. 


Eeview  Questions. — What  were  the  most  important  acts  of  the 
Legislature  of  1899? — What  was  the  cause  of  the  War  in  the  Philip- 
pines?— Describe  the  two  most  important  engagements  of  the  Twen- 
tieth Kansas. — What  report  did  the  Secretary  of  War  give  of  the 
services  of  the  Twentieth? — Tell  of  McKinley's  letter. — What  can  be 
said  of  the  political  and  industrial  affairs  of  Governor  Stanley's 
Administration? — What  important  educational  factor  in  the  State's 
development  do  we  owe  to  the  State  Federation  of  Women's  Clubs? — 
What  illustrious  American  visited  Kansas  during  Stanley's  Adminis- 
tration? 


CHAPTER    XXXI. 


GOVEENOR  BAILEY'S  ADMINISTRATION. 

1903—1905. 

400.  The  Legislature  of  1903.— The  Legislature  of  1903 
elected  Chester  I.  Long  United  States  Senator.  Measures 
were  passed  providing  for  the  Manual  Training  Branch 
of  the  State  Normal  at  Pittsburg,  a 
Truancy  Law,  requiring  the  attend- 
ance at  school  of  all  children  between 
the  ages  of  eight  and  fifteen  years,  the 
placing  of  Kansas  History  in  the  pub- 
lic school  curricula,  a  bounty  of  one 
dollar  a  ton  for  sugar  beets  grown  in 
the  State,  the  protection  of  birds,  and 
the  prohibition  of  the  use  of  slot  ma- 
chines as  gambling  devices.     The  heli- 

anthuS,     or     sunflower,     was     designated    Governor    W.    J.    Balley. 

as  the  State  flower.  Appropriations  were  made  for  the 
Kansas  exhibit  at  the  St.  Louis  Exposition  and  for  a  new 
law  building  at  the  State  University. 

401.  History  of  the  Capitol  Building.— The  State  Cap- 
itol Building  was  completed  in  1903.  During  thirty-three 
years  the   capitol  of  Kansas  has  been    growing.^      The 

1.  The  entire  cost  of  the  building  was  between  three  and  four  millions 
of  dollars.  It  is  one  of  the  handsomest  structures  of  its  kind  in  the 
United  States.  The  following  details  are  worth  considering  :  The  State 
House  grounds  are  bound  by  Eighth,  Tenth,  Jackson  and  Van  Buren 
streets.  The  wings  represent  Ninth  and  Van  Buren,  so  that  the  dome  is 
at    the   intersection    of    the    above-named    streets.      The    cornerstone    was 

275 


276  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

ground  was  given  by  the  Topeka  Town  Association  in 
1862.  In  1866  the  Legislature  provided  for  the  erection 
of  the  east  wing  of  the  capitol  building.  On  the  17th 
of  October  of  that  year  the  corner  stone  was  laid.  The 
wing  was  so  far  completed  that  it  was  occupied  by  the 
State  'officers  in  December,  1869.  The  legislative  halls 
were  first  occupied  for  the  session  of  1870.  The  Legis- 
lature of  1879  provided  for  the  erection  of  the  west  wing. 
The  House  of  Representatives  occupied  the  unfinished 
new  hall  for  the  session  of  1881,  and  the  State  offices  in 
that  wing  became  occupied  during  that  year.  The  Legis- 
lature of  1883  provided  for  commencing  work  on  the 
foundation  of  the  central  portion  of  the  building.  The 
structure  was  so  far  completed  as  to  admit  of  a  tem- 
porary finishing  of  rooms  in  the  basement  of  the  south 
wing,  and  of  the  occupancy  of  them  in  1892. 

The  Legislature  of  1891  and  1893  made  but  very  slight 
appropriations  for  the  capitol  building,  and  the  work 
became  practically  suspended  until  it  was  resumed  under 
the  appropriations  of  the  Legislature  of  1895.  The  capitol 
still  remains  an  illustration  of  the  history  of  the  State, 
"still  achieving,  still  pursuing."  Succeeding  the  line  of 
temporary  structures — frame,  stone,  brick  and  concrete 
— which  served  to  house  the  executive,  judicial  and  leg- 

laid  October  7,  1866.  First  occupied  December  25,  1869.  Base  of  dome, 
80  feet  square.  There  are  399  steps  from  the  ground  to  the  gallery  floor 
of  the  dome,  or  258  feet.  The  top  of  the  dome  is  281  feet  6  inches  high 
and  6  feet  6  inches  in  diameter;  the  flagstaff,  40  feet,  or  a  total  of  3211/. 
feet.  The  sizes  of  the  wings  are  as  follows:  East.  75x110  feet;  south. 
96x122  feet;  west,  76x125  feet;  north,  96x122  feet.  It  is  70  feet  from 
the  ground  to  the  eaves  of  the  wings.  The  large  columns  in  front  of 
the  portico  are  4  feet  in  diameter  at  the  base,  35  feet  6  inches  to  the 
bottom  of  the  capitol,  where  they  are  3  feet  2  inches  in  diameter.  The 
capitol  is  6  feet  6  inches  high  over  all.  In  1901  the  executive  mansion 
was  purchased.  This  building  occupies  spacious  grounds  at  the  corner  of 
Eighth  and  Buchanan  streets,  eight  blocks  from  the  capitol  grounds. 


INDUSTRIAL  DEVELOPMENT.  377 

islative  departments  of  the  government  of  Kansas  for 
sixteen  years,  the  growth  of  the  present  capitol  has  re- 
flected the  growth  of  the  material  State. 

Year  by  year  the  halls  have  stretched  away;  inviting 
porticoes  have  reached  forward ;  columns  have  arisen,  and 
lastly,  the  high  dome  has  mounted  upward.  The  interior 
has  exhibited  modern  improvements  and  inventions,  from 
gas  to  electricity.  While  the  edifice  has  been  rising, 
widening,  extending,  the  prairie  acres  around  it  have 
been  embraced  in  the  transformation  scene  of  which 
Kansas  has  been  the  stage.  The  Capitol  Square,  in  1880, 
furnished  one  of  the  first  marked  observances  of  Arbor 
Day  in  Kansas.  On  the  proclamation  of  the  Mayor  of 
Topeka,  the  people,  young  and  old,  gathered  between  noon 
and  sunset  and  planted  around  the  Capitol  a  thousand 
trees. 

402.  National  Meeting  of  the  Y.  M.  C.  A.— During  the 
early  part  of  Governor  Bailey's  administration,  a  national 
meeting  of  the  Kailway  Young  Men's  Christian  Associa- 
tion was  held  at  Topeka.  President  Roosevelt  was  a  dis- 
tinguished guest  and  addressed  the  meeting.  He  was 
entertained  at  the  Executive  Residence  by  Governor 
Bailey. 

403.  The  Flood  Years.— The  years  1903  and  1904  will 
go  down  in  history  as  the  flood  years  in  Kansas.  In  the 
year  1903  the  great  Kansas  River  flood  occurred.  In 
May  of  that  year  there  was  an  unprecedented  rainfall 
in  the  valleys  of  the  Blue,  the  Republican,  the  Saline,  the 
Solomon  and  the  Smoky  Hill  rivers.  These  streams  all 
flow  into  the  Kansas  River.  Nearly  all  the  towns  along 
these  rivers  were  flooded,  and  thousands  of  acres  of  farm 


278  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

lands  were  inundated.  Many  lives  were  lost  in  these 
valleys.  But  the  greatest  calamity  fell  upon  Topeka, 
Lawrence,  and  Kansas  City.  At  Topeka  the  river  broke 
over  its  banks  and  swept  down  upon  North  Topeka,  cov- 
ering this  entire  portion  of  the  city  for  almost  a  week. 
Nearly  two-score  of  lives  were  swept  out  by  the  waters, 
and  wreck  and  ruin  indescribable  were  left  in  the  wake 
of  the  flood.  Lawrence  (in  proportion  to  its  size)  experi- 
enced the  same  condition  that  befell  Topeka.^  At  Kansas 
City  the  loss  of  life  was  less  appalling,  while  the  property 
loss  was  much  greater.  Right  generously  the  people  of 
the  State  and  of  the  nation  responded  to  the  cry  of  the 
suffering,  and  poured  their  lavish  benefactions  into  the 
stricken  communities.  The  sturdy  Kansas  people  rebuilt 
their  homes  and  business  houses,  and  replanted  their 
crops,  and  the  year  1903  outranked  all  previous  years  in 
agricultural  wealth.  In  1904  every  large  river  of  the 
State  was  out  of  its  banks,  and  small  creeks  became  rag- 
ing rivers.  The  disaster  outclassed  the  two  preceding 
years,  but  the  tragical  feature  of  human  suffering  and 
loss  of  life  was  but  a  small  part  of  the  incident.  Wichita, 
Hutchinson,  Emporia,  Coffeyville,  Winfield,  Ottawa,  and 
all  the  cities  and  towns  of  the  Kansas  River  valley  alike 
endured  calamity.  ''White  man  heap  big  fool  to  build 
big  house  near  river,"  the  Kaw  Indians  were  wont  to 
declare,  but  unfortunately  nobody  listened  to  the  Indians' 

2.  During  the  flood,  Edward  Grafston.  chief  mechanical  engineer  of 
the  Atchison,  Topel<a  &  Santa  Fe  railroad,  built  a  small  side-wheeler 
steamer,  in  which,  with  a  volunteer  crew  of  six  men,  he  rescued  a  great 
many  people.  While  making  the  last  trip  on  the  night  of  June  2,  1903. 
the  boat  was  capsized  and  Mr.  Grafston  was  drowned.  In  apnreciation  of 
his  heroic  self-sacrifice  in  giving  up  his  life  to  save  others,  a  bronze  tablet 
was  placed  in  the  State  Historical  rooms  at  Topeka  by  the  Mechanical 
Engineers. 


INDUSTEIAL  DEVELOPMENT.  279 

warning.  The  three  successive  flood  years,  however,  have 
shown  what  the  State  may  expect  as  a  possibility;  and 
what  the  ignorant  Indian  could  not  teach,  experience  has 
driven  home. 

404.  Semi- Centennial  Anniversary. — The  Semi-Centen- 
nial  Anniversary  of  the  organization  of  Kansas  Territory 
under  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Act,  was  celebrated  at  Topeka 
for  three  days,  beginning  May  30,  1904.  On  Monday  the 
pioneers,  the  soldiers  of  the  Civil  and  of  the  Spanish 
Wars,  and  Governor  Bailey  with  his  staff,  united  in  a 
great  military  parade  in  honor  of  William  H.  Taft,  Sec- 
retary of  War,  who  represented  President  Roosevelt  as 
the  orator  of  the  day.  Tuesday,  Pioneer  Day,  was  given 
to  pioneer  experiences,  and  Wednesday,  Woman's  Day, 
was  characterized  by  a  very  beautiful  flower  parade. 

405.  The    Louisiana    Purchase    Exposition. — At    the 

Louisiana  Purchase  Exposition,  held  in  St.  Louis  in  1904, 
Kansas  stood  the  peer  of  her  sister  states.  Fine  exhibits 
were  made  in  the  educational,  mining,  agricultural,  hor- 
ticultural, dairy  and  live-stock  departments,  winning 
many  prizes  and  medals.  A  beautiful  State  building  was 
erected  in  a  most  desirable  location;  it  was  exquisitely 
furnished  and  became  at  once  a  home  for  all  visiting 
Kansans  and  their  friends.  A  comprehensive  art  exhibit, 
the  work  of  Kansas  artists,  was  a  very  attractive  feature 
of  the  building  and  was  universally  admired  by  the  thou- 
sands who  saw  it.^ 

On  September  30  the  sunflower  became  an  emblem  of 

3.  The  commission  in  charge  of  the  State's  affairs  were  John  C.  Car- 
penter. J.  C.  Morrow,  C.  L.  Luling,  R.  T.  Simon,  and  W.  P.  Waggoner. 
Mrs.  Noble  Prentis  was  hostess  of  the  Kansas  building. 


280  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

prominence,  for  this  was  Kansas  Day,  and  Kansans  by 
thousands  were  in  attendance.  The  Governor  and  his 
staff  were  present.  In  the  morning  a  great  military  parade 
was  followed  by  a  program  in  which  the  Governor  of  the 
State,  President  Francis,  of  the  Exposition,  and  Henry 
Allen  and  David  Overmeyer,  two  of  the  most  eloquent 
sons  of  Kansas,  took  part.  The  exercises  were  held  in 
the  Plaza  of  St.  Louis.  The  reception  that  evening  in 
honor  of  Governor  and  Mrs.  Bailey  was  one  of  the  most 
beautiful  functions  given  on  the  terrace  of  states. 

406.  Election  of  1904.— The  close  of  this  administra- 
tion was  marked  by  a  factional  fight  in  the  Eepublican 
party.  The  alignment  of  the  contestants  was  either  with 
the  ''Boss-busters"  or  with  the  ''Machine."  Edward  W. 
Hoch  was  the  standard  bearer  of  the  "Boss-busters"  and 
was  elected.  The  Democratic  candidate  was  David  M. 
Dale. 


Eeview  Questions. — What  were  the  most  important  acts  of  the 
Legislature  of  1903? — Give  the  history  af  the  capitol  building. — 
Eelate  the  story  of  the  flood  years. — Tell  of  the  heroism  of  Edward 
Grafstrom. — What  anniversaries  marked  the  year  1904? — Do  you 
think  both  of  these  anniversaries  should  be  celebrated? — Give  reasons 
for  your  opinions. — What  is  meant  by  the  term  ''Boss-busters,"  and 
who  was  their  chief? 


CHAPTER     XXXII. 


GOVEENOK  HOCH'S  ADMINISTRATION. 

1905—1909. 

407.  The  Legislature  of  1905.— The  session  of  the  Leg- 
islature of  1905  was  marked  by  the  contest  of  the  State 
against  the  Standard  Oil  Company  and  the  railroad  cor- 
porations. The  remarkable  oil  discov- 
eries in  the  State  furnished  a  rich  field 
for  the  Standard  Oil  Company,  and  it 
entered  with  all  the  power  of  its  mil- 
lions of  capital  and  its  years  of  experi- 
ence. The  firm  stand  of  the  Governor 
and  of  the  Legislature  for  equal  rights 
for  all  and  special  privileges  to  none 
served  as  an  object  lesson  not  only  for 
other  states,  but  also  for  the  nation. 
In  order  to  prevent  a  monopoly  of 
transportation  facilities,  pipe  lines  were  made  common 
carriers  and  maximum  rates  were  fixed  for  the  trans- 
portation of  crude  oil  by  railroad.  As  a  climax  of  legis- 
lation, a  bill  was  passed  for  the  construction  of  a  State 
oil  refinery  at  Peru,^  in  Chautauqua  County,  to  be  oper- 
ated as  a  branch  of  the  State  Penitentiary.  Important 
railroad   legislation    was    enacted    as    follows :      An    act 

1.     This  bill  providing  for  a  state  oil  refinery  was  afterward  declared 
unconstitutional  by  the  Supreme  Court. 

281 


Governor    Edward    W 
Hoch. 


282  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

providing  uniform  freight  rates,  the  prohibition  of  spe- 
cial privileges,  such  as  rebates,  etc. ;  a  provision  for  the 
furnishing  of  cars  without  discrimination  for  shipping 
purposes,  and  the  regulation  of  railroad  employees'  hours 
of  labor. 

A  significant  enactment  was  the  provision  for  a  Board 
of  Control  of  the  charitable  institutions  of  the  State,  thus 
releasing  these  great  institutions  from  political  control 
and  making  efficiency  the  rule  of  tenure  of  office. 

The  children  and  youth  of  Kansas  were  also  remem- 
bered by  this  Legislature.  An  act  was  passed  to  establish 
juvenile  courts  and  to  provide  for  the  care  of  dependent, 
neglected  and  delinquent  children;  a  child  labor  law  was 
enacted  prohibiting  the  employment  of  children  under 
fourteen  years  of  age  in  factories,  packing  houses  and 
mines,  and  under  sixteen  years  of  age  in  certain  other 
employments.  Other  acts  of  the  Legislature  were  pro- 
vision for  a  State  printing  plant  and  a  State  depository 
for  State  funds. 

An  appropriation  was  made  to  assist  the  Daughters  of 
the  American  Revolution  in  marking  the  Santa  Fe  Trail. 

408.  The  Battleship  Kansas. — One  of  the  finest  battle- 
ships of  the  American  Navy  is  the  ''Kansas."  On  August 
12,  1905,  at  Camden,  New  Jersey,  Miss  Anna  Hoch,  the 
youngest  daughter  of  Governor  Hoch,  christened  the 
''Kansas"  with  water  from  the  John  Brown  Spring  in 
Linn  County.  It  is  the  custom  to  use  wine  in  the  christen- 
ing ceremony  when  ships  put  to  sea,  but  since  the  law  and 
the  sentiment  of  the  State  is  for  prohibition.  Governor 
Hoch's  daughter  preferred  to  use  water,  so  as  she  re- 
peated the  words,  "I  christen  thee  Kansas,"  and  broke 


INDUSTEIAL  DEVELOPMENT. 


283 


the  bottle,  it  was  pure  sparkling  water  and  not  wine  that 
fell  over  the  prow  of  the  great  ship. 

The  battleship  received  two  gifts  from  the  State,  one 
a  $5,000  silver  service,  voted  by  the  Legislature,  and  the 
other  a  stand  of  colors  given  by  the  Daughters  of  the 
American  Revolution. 

409.  Marking  the  Santa  Fe  Trail.— In  1906  the  Daugh- 
ters of  the  American  Revolution  marked  the  Santa  Fe 
Trail.  The  trail  which  led  the  dauntless  explorer,  dream- 
ing of  conquest,  into  the  far  unknown;  the  road  which 
the  pioneer — progenitor  of  a  sturdy  race — had  followed 
in  search  of  a  prairie  home,  the  broad  mark  of  the  com- 


A  Marker  on  the  Santa  Fe  Trail 


284  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

merce  of  the  unturned  sod  was  being  forgotten  and  oblit- 
erated in  the  progress  of  the  plow  as  civilization  devel- 
oped the  resources  of  a  great  State.  Lest  the  children 
of  Kansas  should  forget  the  path  their  fathers  had  trod, 
the  Daughters  of  the  American  Revolution,  assisted  by 
an  appropriation  of  $1,000  from  the  Legislature,  indi- 
cated with  granite  boulders  the  path  of  the  old  trail.^ 
On  the  face  of  each  boulder  is  deeply  carved  the  follow- 
ing inscription : 

SANTA  FE  TRAIL 

1822-1872 

MARKED  BY  THE  DAUGHTERS  OF  THE  AMERICAN 

REVOLUTION  AND  THE  STATE  OF  KANSAS, 

1906. 

410.  The  Pike  Centennial.— From  the  26th  to  the  29th 
of  September,  1906,  Kansas  celebrated  her  first  centen- 
nial. It  was  held  at  the  Pike  Monument  near  Republic 
City,  in  honor  of  the  100th  anniversary  of  the  visit  of 
Zebulon  Montgomery  Pike  to  the  Pawnee  village,   and 

2.  The  school  children  of  the  State  contributed  a  penny  apiece  to  the 
Santa  Fe  Trail  fund,  adding  thereby  the  sum  of  $584.40. 

Under  the  auspices  of  the  department  of  American  History,  State  Uni- 
versity, seven  points  of  interest  in  the  city  of  Lawrence  were  marlied  by 
marble  slabs  in  the  fall  of  1898.     The  following  is  a  list  : 

1.  In  front  of  Fraser  hall.  University  of  Kansas,  Mount  Oread — "Site 
of  Barracks  and  Trenches,  1863." 

2.  Louisiana  street,  between  Quincy  and  Hancock — "Site  of  Governor 
Robinson's  first  house  ;    burned  by  SherifE  Jones,  May  21,  1856." 

3.  Ohio  street,  between  Berkeley  and  Warren — "Site  of  Unitarian 
church.     First  free  public  school  in  Kansas." 

4.  Winthrop  street,  between  Indiana  and  Louisiana — "Here  Griswold, 
Baker,  Thorp  and  Trask  were  shot,  August  21,  1863." 

5.  Corner  of  Massachusetts  and  Winthrop  streets — "Site  of  Free-state 
Hotel ;  burned  by  Sheriff  Jones,  May  21,  1856.  Eldridge  House  ;  burned 
by  Quantrell,  August  21,  1863." 

6.  Massachusetts  streets,  between  Winthrop  and  Pinckney — "Site  of 
first  house  in  Lawrence,  sixty  feet  east." 

7.  New  ETampshire  street,  between  Warren  and  Berkeley — "near  here 
a  score  of  unarmed  recruits  were  shot,  August  21,  1863." 


INDUSTEIAL  DEVELOPMENT.  285 

of  the  first  floating  of  the  United  States  Flag  in  Kansas. 
National  banners  were  unfurled;  cannon  were  fired; 
bands  played  patriotic  airs,  and  addresses  were  made  by 
noted  Kansans  to  the  great  crowd  of  people  assembled 
from  over  the  State.  By  order  of  the  State  Superintend- 
ent of  Public  Instruction,  the  schools  of  Kansas  devoted 
Friday  afternoon,  the  29th,  to  the  story  of  ''Pike  and  the 
Flag."  Thus  the  school  children  of  Kansas  united  in 
patriotic  commemoration  with  the  celebration  at  Republic 
City. 

411.  Election  of  1906.— In  the  election  of  1906,  Gov- 
ernor Hoch  was  the  Republican  candidate  for  re-election.- 
William  A.  Harris  was  the  Democratic  candidate.  Gov- 
ernor Hoch  was  re-elected. 

412.  Resignation  of  Senator  Burton. — Senator  Burton 
resigned  his  seat  in  the  Senate  of  the  United  States  in 
November,  1906.  Governor  Hoch  appointed  Judge  A.  W. 
Benson  to  fill  the  unexpired  term. 

413.  The  Legislature  of  1907.— The  Legislature  of  1907 
elected  Charles  Curtis  United  States  Senator  to  suc- 
ceed Judge  Benson.  Among  the  most  important  acts  of 
the  Legislature  are  the  following:  a  tax  law  to  provide 
for  the  a-ssessment  and  taxation  of  property  at  its  actual 
value,  a  law  reducing  railroad  fare  from  three  to  two 
cents  a  mile  in  all  parts  of  the  State,  an  anti-pass  law 
prohibiting  passes  on  railroads,  a  law  providing  for  free 
kindergartens,  and  a  law  for  the  display  of  the  United 
States  Flag  on  schoolhouses.  Lincoln's  Birthday  was 
made  a  legal  holiday. 


286  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

414.  Special  Session  of  the  Legislature. — Governor 
Hoch  called  a  special  session  of  the  Legislature  in  1908. 
A  most  important  act  was  a  state-wide  primary  election 
law,  which  provides  that  all  candidates  for  elective  offices 
shall  be  nominated  by  the  vote  of  the  people  rather  than 
by  party  caucus. 

415.  The  Prohibitory  Law. — Governor  Hoch's  admin- 
istration is  particularly  noted  for  its  enforcement  of  law 
in  all  departments.  This  is  especially  true  of  the  Pro- 
hibitory Law.  Never  in  the  history  of  the  State  had  this 
law  been  so  well  enforced.  Due  credit  must  be  given  to 
Attorney-General  Jackson,  who  has  been  instant  in  sea- 
son and  out  of  seas'on,  to  the  State  Temperance  Union, 
to  the  Womens'  Christian  Temperance  Union,  and  to  the 
citizens  of  the  State,  who  have  made  constant  and  efficient 
warfare  against  the  violation  of  law  and  for  its  enforce- 
ment. 

416.  The  First  State  Primary.— On  August  3,  1908,  the 
first  primary  under  the  new  law  was  held.  W.  R.  Stubbs 
received  the  Republican  nomination  for  Governor,  and 
J.  D.  Botkin  the  Democratic  nomination.  J.  L.  Bristow 
received  the  Republican  nomination  to,  succeed  Chester 
I.  Long  in  the  Senate,  and  Hugh  Farrelly  received  the 
Democratic  nomination  for  the  same  position. 

417.  Election  of  1908.— W.  R.  Stubbs,  the  Republican 
nominee  for  Governor,  was  elected.  W.  H.  Taft  was 
elected  President  of  the  United  States  in  the  National 
Election. 


INDUSTEIAL  DEVELOPMENT.  287 

Eeview  Questions. — What  significant  contest  occurred  in  the 
Legislature  of  1905? — Why  was  this  Legislature  the  center  of  interest 
in  Nation  as  well  as  State? — What  was  the  value  of  its  work? — How 
were  the  children  and  young  people  remembered? — Describe  the 
launching  of  the  battleship  ' '  Kansas. ' ' — To  whom  do  we  owe  the 
marking  of  the  Santa  Fe  Trail? — How  many  years  intervened  between 
its  marking  and  Bechnell  's  first  trip  along  it  ? — What  was  the  first 
centennial  celebration  in  Kansas? — Why  do  we  honor  General  Pike? — 
What  two  laws  do  you  consider  the  most  important  among  those 
passed  by  the  Legislature  of  1907? — What  was  the  act  of  the  special 
session? — How  was  the  Prohibitory  Law  strengthened? — Who  was 
nominated  for  governor  at  the  first  State  primary? 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

GOVEKNOE  STUBBS'  ADMINISTRATION.     - 
1909 

418.  The  Legislature  of  1909.— The  legislature  of  1909 
elected  Joseph  L.  Bristow  United  States  senator.  The 
following  are  among  the  important  acts  which  were 
passed:  a  bank  guarantee  law  establishing  a  system  of 
insurance  of  bank  deposits ;  a  law  prohibiting  the  sale 
of  liquor  in  the  state  for  any  purpose ;  a  law  giving  power 
to  establish  commission  form  of  government  in  cities  upon 
a  vote  of  the  people ;  a  child-labor  law  recognizing  the 
rights  of  children  to  childhood  free  from  injurious  labor; 
a  law  prohibiting  the  sale  of  cigarettes  and  cigarette 
papers ;  and  a  law  providing  for  normal  courses  in  high 
schools  and  accredited  academies.  An  appropriation  of 
$200,000  was  made  for  the  erection  in  Topeka  of  a  me- 
morial hall  in  honor  of  the  old  soldiers.  The  hall  is  to 
be  used  jointly  by  the  G.  A.  R.  and  the  State  Historical 
Society. 

419.  Lincoln  Day— February  12,  1909.— The  one- 
hundredth  anniversary  of  the  birth  of  Abraham  Lincoln, 
was  generally  observed  over  the  state,  as  a  day  devoted 
to  tHe  memory  of  the  great  American.  The  words  "with 
malice  toward  none,  with  charity  for  all,  with  firmness  in 

288 


INDUSTEIAL  DEVELOPMENT.  289 

the  right  a§  God  gives  us  to  see  the  right,  let  us  strive 
on  to  finish  the  work  we  are  in,"  echoed  from  many  a 
prairie  schoolhouse  and  hall  of  learning  and  devotion. 
The  legislature  celebrated  the  day  at  Lawrence  as  guests 
of  the  State  University. 

420.  Death  of  Ex-Governor  Morrill. — Early  in  March 
of  the  year  1909,  Kansas  people  gave  tribute  of  affection 
and  esteem  through  press  and  pulpit  to  Ex-Governor 
Morrill,  who  died  on  the  fourteenth  of  the  month  at  San 
Antonio,  Texas,  whither  he  had  gone  in  the  hope  of  re- 
newing his  health.  Hiawatha,  his  beloved  home  town, 
witnessed  its  greatest  gatherings  in  appreciation  of  its 
favorite  founder  and  one  of  the  State's  most  loyal  pio- 
neers. The  first  of  these  gatherings  was  in  honor  of  his 
election  as  governor  of  the  commonwealth  and  the  last 
in  memory  of  a  noble  life  cast  in  heroic  mold  and  greatly 
lived.  In  the  Kansas  hall  of  fame  his  name  may  well  be 
inscribed. 

421.  The  Baker  Anniversary. — In  June  of  the  year 
1909,  Baker  University  celebrated  her  fiftieth  anniversary. 
It  was  an  occasion  of  great  interest.  Alumni  and  friends 
of  the  school  came  from  far  and  near ;  representatives  of 
nation  and  state,  of  universities  and  colleges,  of  schools 
and  learned  societies  extended  their  greetings.  Founded 
during  the  severe  days  of  the  "Struggle"  the  university 
has  developed  with  the  state,  sharing  her  vicissitudes  and 
participating  in  her  successes.  Baker's  noblest  gifts  are 
her  sons  and  daughters  who  have  gone  out  to  serve  in 
the  world's  work. 


290 


HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 


Library  of  Baker  University. 


L 'ENVOI. 


The  State  at  the  entrance  of  a  new  era  stands  rich  in 
the  products  of  field  and  mine,  but  richer  in  her  boys  and 
girls,  her  strong  young  manhood  and  womanhood.  Pro- 
tected from  the  evils  of  alcohol,  the  cigarette,  and  child- 
labor;  shielded  from  vice;  offered  every  opportunity  for 
development  in  schools  and  colleges,  libraries  and 
churches ;  breathing  the  free  health-giving  air  of  the 
prairies,  and  following  the  high  ideals  of  the  state  and 
the  nation,  the  youth  of  Kansas  is  her  most  significant 
wealth,  her  most  glorious  offering.  Long  may  the  great 
state  live  in  favor  with  God  and  man.  May  she  ever  keep 
her  faith  in  the  true,  the  beautiful  and  the  good,  and 
when  clouds  and  darkness  come,  as  come  they  will,  may 


INDUSTEIAL  DEVELOPMENT.  291 

there  ever  be  emblazoned  in  the  clear  blue  above  them 
the  old  shibboleth  "Ad  astra  per  aspera. " 

Eeview  Questions. — Name  the  three  most  important  laws  made 
by  the  Legislature  of  1909. — Memorize  Lincoln's  Gettysburg  address. 
— Note  the  times  in  your  Kansas  history  when  Lincoln  came  in  touch 
with  our  State. — Tell  the  story  of  Governor  Morrill's  life. — What 
college  celebrated  its  fiftieth  anniversary  in  1909? — Translate  ''Ad 
astra  per  aspera." 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

INDUSTKIAL  KANSAS. 

While  the  story  of  human  events  in  Kansas  portrays  the 
life  of  a  sturdy,  intelligent  and  progressive  people,  its 
industrial  history  shows  the  response  of  the  earth  to  their 
hardy  toil.  The  wind-blown  prairie  grass  has  yielded  to 
the  plow  and  fields  rich  in  agricultural  products  now  bask 
their  abundant  wealth  in  the  luxuriant  sunshine  while 
cattle  graze  on  a  thousand  hills.  The  yearly  value  of 
farm  products  in  the  state  is  $75,000,000  in  excess  of  the 
aggregate  coining  value  of  all  the  gold  and  silver  mined 
annually  in  the  United  States. 

The  State  is  no  longer  a  treeless  prairie.  The  Kansas 
farmer  found  that  every  tree  set  deep  in  the  soil  added 
to  the  sum  of  power  that  conquers  the  waste  places  and 
makes  the  desert  blossom,  so  he  began  to  plant  trees 
about  his  home  until  Kansas  has  some  of  the  largest 
home-grown  forests  and  orchards  in  the  United  States. 

Treasures  hidden  below  the  surface  have  been  dis- 
covered and  mineral  wealth  undreamed  of  in  the  early 
days  adds  to  the  state's  riches. 

Wheat. — The  western  part  of  the  State  is  one  great 
wheat  field.  Kansas  stands  first  in  wheat  among  the 
states  of  the  nation  and  the  provinces  of  the  world.  The 
total  yield  in  1908  was  76,808,922  bushels,  valued  at  $63,- 
885,146.    The  following  diagram  shows  the  aggregate  pro- 

292 


INDUSTEIAL  KANSAS.  293 

duction  of  wheat  by  the  leading  wheat  states  from  1902- 
1906  inclusive. 


KANSAS. 
MINNESOTA. 
NO.  DAKOTA. 
NEBRASKA. 
SO.  DAKOTA. 


Bushels. 
356,928,238 

346,985,0«2 

325,524,058 

226,629,249 

208,871,692 


Barton  county  ranks  highest  of  the  counties  in  wheat 
production. 

Corn. — The  eastern  part  of  the  State  is  shut  in  witl;i 
''walls  of  corn."  While  wheat  has  made  Kansas  famous, 
corn  has  made  her  rich.  The  largest  crop  of  corn  in  Kan- 
sas was  that  of  1889,  which  was  273,888,000  bushels.  The 
most  valuable  in  money  returns  was  the  crop  of  1908. 
The  yield  for  that  year  was  150,000,000  bushels,  and  was 
worth  at  market  price  $82,642,462.  In  1905,  an  average 
year,  the  Kansas  corn  production  was  more  than  all 
South  America  and  exceeded  the  crop  of  Egypt,  Italy, 
France,  Bulgaria,  and  Russia  proper  put  together.  Kan- 
sas ranks  fifth  among  the  states  of  the  Union  in  the  pro- 
duction of  corn.  According  to  the  Government  report 
the  value  of  the  corn  crop  of  1907  was  greater  than  that 
of  the  combined  corn  crops  of  New  York,  Pennsylvania, 
Massachusetts,  California  and  nineteen  additional  states 
and  territories.  Jewell  county  ranks  highest  in  corn  pro- 
duction. 

Alfalfa. — All  who  know  alfalfa  best  esteem  it  one  of  the 
richest  additions  to  the  agriculture  of  America.    Kansas 


294  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

seems  particularly  well  adapted  to  its  successful  growth 
and  ranks  first  in  its  production.  In  1908  there  were 
878,283  acres  of  alfalfa  in  the  state.  It  not  only  yields  an 
abundant  crop  which  is  cut  from  one  to  five  times  a  year, 
but  it  bears  upon  its  root  a  parasite  which  restores  and 
enriches,  rather  than  depletes  the  soil. 

Live-stock. — Since  the  days  when  the  first  cowboy  rode 
over  the  plains,  cattle  have  been  an  ever  enriching 
product.  In  1908  over  two  and  one-half  million  cattle 
grazed  on  the  Kansas  prairies.  Nearly  one  million  horses 
valued  at  $95,682,468  are  on  the  live-stock  list  of  the 
same  year.  On  account  of  the  extensive  raising  of  live- 
stock, large  packing  houses  have  been  built  in  the  state. 
Kansas  City,  Kansas,  has  the  second  most  extensive  meat 
industry  in  the  world.  The  total  value  of  cattle,  hogs, 
sheep,  horses  and  mules  shipped  from  Kansas  City  from 
1871-1906  was  $2,212,751,000. 

Mineral  Wealth. — The  first  mineral  to  be  discovered  in 
Kansas  was  coal.  It  is  found  in  the  eastern  counties  and 
yields  annually  $10,000,000.  At  the  present  rate  of  min- 
ing it  is  estimated  that  the  Kansas  deposit  would  last 
2,000  years.  The  discovery  and  development  of  the  won- 
derful oil  and  gas  fields  in  the  southeastern  part  of  the 
State  has  been  most  remarkable.  The  production  since 
1900  suggests  that  the  Kansas  field  has  but  few  rivals. 
Gas  is  piped  to  Kansas  City,  Wichita,  Topeka  and  other 
large  cities  of  the  State  to  be  used  in  thousands  of  homes 
for  light  and  fuel  and  for  power  in  many  large  factories. 

Kansas  ranks  third  in  the  production  of  salt.  The  an- 
nual output  is  2,000,000  barrels  and  is  sufficient  to  supply 
the  world.     Hutchinson  is  the  center  of  the  salt  produc- 


INDUSTEIAL   KANSAS.  295 

tion  by  evaporation.  Other  localities  furnish  rock  salt. 
Quarries  of  limestone  and  sandstone  for  building  purposes 
and  rock  gypsum  are  extensively  worked.  Kansas  gyp- 
sum plaster  was  used  in  nearly  all  the  buildings  of  the 
St.  Louis  Exposition  in  1904,  and  the  Columbian  Exposi- 
sition  in  1893. 

The  lead  and  zinc  of  the  State  is  in  the  southeastern 
portion.  Kansas  ranks  as  the  second  State  in  the  produc- 
tion of  these  ores. 

Manufactures. — Kansas'  chief  manufactures  are  in  the 
conversion  of  farm  products  into  marketable  commodities, 
such  as  butter,  flour  and  meat.  $100,000,000  is  repre- 
sented in  the  meat  packing  business.  Topeka  has  the 
largest  creamery  in  the  world.  The  flour  and  grist  mill 
productions,  which  are  famous  the  world  over,  amount 
to  $5,000,000  annually.  Sugar  is  manufactured  from 
sugar  beets  in  the  western  part  of  the  State.  A  factory  is 
located  at  Garden  City. 

The  advent  of  natural  gas  has  brought  in  many  new 
lines  of  manufacturing.  Glass  making  has  become  an 
important  industry  in  the  gas  fields  and  window  glass, 
bottles,  table  and  other  glassware  are  manufactured. 
Zinc  smelting  is  quite  significant.  In  1906  the  refined 
product  of  zinc  ore  was  worth  $16,000,000.  Over  half  of 
the  spelter,  or  refined  zinc  ore,  used  in  the  United  States 
is  smelted  in  Kansas.  As  a  cement  making  field  Kansas 
is  fast  coming  into  prominence.  Cement  making  materi- 
als, limestone  and  shale  are  at  hand  in  inexhaustible 
supply.  Brick  plants  are  numerous  in  the  southeastern 
part  of  the  State.  Building,  paving,  fancy  and  sidewalk 
bricks  are  made,  as  well  as  roof  tile,  pottery,  etc.     Car- 


296  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

shops  employ  thousands  of  people.  Binding  twine  is 
manufactured  extensively  at  the  state  penitentiary  by  the 
prisoners  and  sold  by  the  state.  Oil  refineries  are  found 
in  the  oil  regions;  at  least  seventeen  independent  oil 
refineries  were  in  active  operation  in  1908,  representing 
several  millions  of  wealth. 


Review  Questions. — What  has  been  the  progress  of  the  State  in 
industrial  affairs'? — Compare  Kansas  with  other  States  in  the  pro- 
duction of  wheat? — Tell  the  corn  story. — What  is  the  value  of  alfalfa? 
— What  is  the  importance  of  the  live-stock  industry? — Trace  the 
development  of  Kansas'  mineral  wealth. — Name  the  most  important 
manufactured  products  of  the  State. — Should  manufacturing  be  more 
extensively  developed? 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

EDUCATIONAL  INSTITUTIONS. 

While  the  earth  and  the  fulness  thereof  has  engaged 
the  thought  of  the  State,  it  has  not  been  wholly  given 
over  to  money  making  and  material  improvement.  The 
spirit  of  the  grand  old  pioneer  is  with  us  still,  and  the 
generous  education  of  its  people  is  even  dearer  now  than 
it  was  when  the  foundation  of  the  University  was  laid  be- 
fore the  grass  had  had  time  to  cover  the  ground  left  bare 
by  the  Indian  tepee.  The  Twentieth  Century  is  demand- 
ing men  and  women  of  preparation  and  ability  and  Kan- 
sas provides  generously  for  her  future  citizens.  The  State 
University  with  its  splendid  teaching  force  and  fine  equip- 
ment, the  State  Normal  School  with  its  branches  at  Hayes 
and  Pittsburg,  and  the  Agricultural  College,  said  to  have 
the  largest  attendance  of  any  school  of  its  kind  in  the 
world,  are  all  schools  of  which  the  State  may  well  be 
proud.  Over  6,000  students  were  enrolled  in  these  schools 
in  1908.  Beside  the  state  schools  there  are  thirty-four 
denominational  and  private  schools,  enrolling  10,000 
students.  Several  of  these  rank  among  the  strong  col- 
leges of  the  country.  The  Western  University  at  Quin- 
daro  and  the  Topeka  Industrial  Institute  are  schools  for 
the  education  of  the  colored  youth  of  the  State.  Con- 
sidering grade  and  high  schools  the  State  has  about  9,000 
school  buildings  and  over  12,000  teachers  for  its  500,000 
children  enrolled. 

297 


298  HISTORY  or  KANSAS. 

With  every  year  the  standard  of  the  educational  work 
is  raised  and  the  teaching  force  becomes  more  efficient. 
The  appointment  of  an  educational  commission  by  Gover- 
nor Hoch  is  a  significant  event  in  our  educational  history. 

Libraries. — Closely  associated  with  education  is  the 
library  movement  of  the  Twentieth  Century.  There  has 
been  a  general  demand  for  libraries  and  even  the  remoter 
places,  through  the  stimulus  of  the  Traveling  Library 
have  begun  making  institutions  of  their  own.  Andrew 
Carnegie  has  given  many  very  fine  libraries  to  cities  in 
Kansas.  Among  those  favored  are  Emporia  with  the 
Anderson  Memorial,  Leavenworth,  Ottawa,  Lawrence, 
Hutchinson,  Fort  Scott,  Kansas  City,  Manhattan,  New- 
ton, Salina  and  Arkansas  City.  The  city  and  town  schools 
of  the  state  have  reported  300  libraries.  It  is  not  known 
how  many  libraries  are  in  the  district  schools.  Beside 
these  almost,  if  not  all,  of  the  universities  and  colleges 
and  many  cities  have  most  excellent  libraries. 

STATE  INSTITUTIONS. 

Name.  Location.      Established. 

Educational. 

University Lawrence     18C4 

Normal  School : 

Main    School Emporia     1864 

Manual    Training     Pittsburg     1903 

Western   Branch    Hays     1901 

Agricultural  College  : 

Main    School    Manhattan     1864 

Experiment    Station    Hays     1901 

Institution  for  the  Education  of  the  Blind Kansas     City 1864 

Institution  for  the  Education  of  the  Deaf  and 

Dumb Olathe    1864 

Western    University    (Colored    Industrial) Quindaro     1901 

Penal   and   Reformatory.  , 

Penitentiary      Lansing    1863 

Boys'   Industrial   School Topeka     1879 

Reformatory     Hutchinson      1886 

Girls'    Industrial    School Beloit     1889 


EDUCATIONAL  INSTITUTIONS.  299 

Hospitals  for  the  Insane. 

Osawatomie     1863 

Topeka     1875 

Parsons      1903 

Other    Institutions. 

For     Feeble-Minded     Youth '. Winfield     1881 

Soldier's    Orphan     Home Atchison     1885 

Soldier's    Home    Dodge    City     1889 

Mother   Bickerdyke    Home Ellsworth     1901 

UNITED    STATES   INSTITUTIONS    IN   KANSAS. 
Name.  Location. 

Haskell    Institute    Lawrence 

National   Cemetery    Leavenworth 

United   States   Prisons,   Civil   and   Military Leavenworth 

Western  Branch  United  States   Soldier's  Home Leavenworth 

DENOMINATIONAL  COLLEGES. 

Name.  Location.  Denomination. 

Baker   University Baldwin     Methodist 

Bethany  College Lindsborg    Swedish   Lutheran 

Bethany   College Topeka     Episcopal 

Bethel    College Newton     Mennonite 

Campbell    College Holton    United  Brethren 

College   of   Emporia Emporia     Presbyterian 

Cooper   Memorial    College Sterling    United   Presbyterian 

Fairmount   College Wichita      Congregational 

Friends    University Wichita      Friends 

German-Baptist   College McPherson    .......  Dunkard 

Highland    University Highland      Presbyterian 

Kansas   City   University Kansas  City    Methodist   Protestant 

Kansas  Wesleyan Salina Methodist 

McPherson  College McPherson     ....'...  German-Baptist 

Midland   College Atchison    Lutheran 

Ottawa  University Ottawa     Baptist 

Southwestern   College Winfield     Methodist 

St.   Benedict's  College Atchison    Catholic 

St.   John's   College Winfield     Lutheran 

St.   Mary's  College St.    Mary's    Catholic 

Washburn    University. Topeka     Congregational 

Walden     College McPherson     Swedish    Mission 

Eeview  Questions. — Name  and  locate  the  State  educational 
institutions  of  Kansas. — What  part  do  the  denominational  schools 
play  in  educational  work? — How  many  children  are  enrolled  in  the 
public  schools? — Why  do  you  consider  the  appointment  of  the  educa- 
tional commission  significant? — What  is  the  value  of  the  traveling 
library? — How  many  Carnegie  libraries  are  located  in  the  State? — 
Name  and  locate  State  institutions  other  than  educational. — What 
federal  institutions  are  in  Kansas? — Name  and  locate  some  of  the 
denominational  colleges. 


CHAPTER    XXXVI. 

KANSAS   LITEEATUEE. 

The  first  printing  press  brought  to  what  is  now  Kansas 
was  for  the  use  of  an  Indian  mission.  The  first  books 
printed  were  Indian  books.  But  few  copies  of  these  books 
now  exist;  the  readers  long  ago  departed. 

Kansas  and  the  Press. — The  beginnings  of  the  modern 
daily  American  newspaper  press  were  almost  contempo- 
raneous with  the  beginnings  of  civilized  and  enlightened 
Kansas.  The  use  of  the  telegraph,  in  those  days  called 
the  "magnetic  telegraph,"  for  newspaper  work,  was,  in 
1854,  becoming  general.  Power  presses  were  first  con- 
sidered necessary,  and  another  newspaper  adjunct,  first 
developed  in  Kansas  Territory,  was  the  "correspondent." 
Several  of  the  greatest  papers  of  the  country  maintained 
"special  correspondents"  in  Kansas.  Many  of  these 
young  men  possessed  much  ability,  and  made  a  national 
reputation,  as  William  A.  Phillips,  the  correspondent  of 
the  "New  York  Tribune.'*'  Many  of  these  were  not 
merely  writers,  but  doers  of  the  word,  and  took  part  in 
the  battles  of  the  Territory. 

The  First  Newspapers. — Kansas  had  newspapers  as 
soon  as  it  had  a  population.  The  first  newspaper  was 
the  Leavenworth  "Herald."    Its  first  office  was  the  shade 

300 


KANSAS  LITEEATUEE.  301 

of  a  large  elm  tree.  Lawrence  had  newspapers  very  soon 
after.  John  and  Joseph  Speer  and  George  W.  Brown 
became  '' toilers  of  the  pen  and  press"  at  Lawrence,  in 
October,  1854.  The  newspapers  were  all  political,  either 
for  freedom  or  slavery.  In  the  case  of  the  Free  State 
papers,  their  names  often  indicated  their  principles,  as 
the  "Herald  of  Freedom,"  or  "Freedom's  Champion." 
A  great  deal  of  talent  found  its  way  into  Kansas  news- 
paper offices  of  that  early  time.  Napoleon  said  that  every 
French  soldier  carried  a  marshal's  baton  in  his  knap- 
sack; in  Kansas,  future  governors,  senators,  chieftains, 
and  ambassadors  carried  printers'  rules  in  their  pockets. 

Early  Observers. — The  ferment  in  Kansas  brought  to 
the  scene  interested  observers,  writers  of  present  or  fu- 
ture eminence ;  these  wrote  books  about  Kansas.  Some 
of  these  were  guide  books,  some  histories,  some  narra- 
tives of  personal  experience.  One  of  the  first  writers  on 
territorial  Kansas  was  Edward  Everett  Hale,  since 
those  days  famous  in  the  literary  history  of  the  country. 
Mr.  Hale's  book  was  published  in  1854,  and  was  entitled 
"Kanzas  and  Nebraska:  the  History,  Geographical  and 
Physical  Characteristics,  and  Political  Position  of  Those 
Territories ;  an  Account  of  the  Emigrant  Aid  Companies, 
and  Directions  to  Emigrants."  Mr.  Hale's  publication 
was  not  intended  as  "elegant  literature,"  but  to  direct 
Northern  emigration  to  Kansas.  Much  that  was  written 
in  the  early  days  and  since  has  been  with  the  same  pur- 
pose. 

Some  Early  Books. — The  missionaries  who  lived  and 
labored  in  Kansas  while  it  was  still  Indian  country,  wrote 


302  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

their  books  of  their  charges  and  their  efforts.  To  these 
belong  the  narratives  of  Isaac  McCoy  and  Henry  Harvey, 
who  wrote  a  ''History  of  the  Shawnee  Indians,  from  the 
Year  1681  to  1854."  The  "correspondent,"  of  whom 
mention  has  been  made,  collected  his  letters  into  volumes. 
Such  was  G.  Douglas  Brewerton's  "War  in  Kansas,"  Mr. 
Brewerton  being  a  correspondent  of  the  "New  York 
Herald,"  and  supposed  to  be  impartial.  Other  books  were 
not  presumed  to  be  neutral  in  sentiment,  as  "The  Con- 
quest of  Kansas,"  by  William  A.  Phillips.  Neither  could 
the  imputation  of  lack  of  feeling  be  charged  upon  "Kan- 
sas, its  Interior  and  Exterior  Life,"  by  Mrs.  Sara  T.  L. 
Kobinson,  wife  of  Governor  Charles  Kobinson.  This  book 
ran  through  six  or  more  editions,  and  was  favorably 
noticed  by  the  London  reviews.  Speaking  of  British  opin- 
ion, a  very  readable  book  about  Kansas  is  "The  English- 
man in  Kansas,  or  Squatter  Life  and  Border  Warfare," 
by  Thomas  H.  Gladstone,  a  Kansas  correspondent  of  the 
London  "Times,"  and  a  kinsman  of  William  Ewart  Glad- 
stone, England's  great  statesman.  These  and  many  more 
books  were  written  in  and  about  Kansas  in  the  days  of 
the  "troubles,"  and  largely  inspired  by  the  "troubles." 
They  are,  generally  speaking,  rare  books  now.  In  some 
cases  the  "visible  supply"  of  them  is  reduced  to  one  or 
two  copies,  but  they  were  widely  read  when  new,  and  the 
events  of  which  they  spoke  were  fresh  in  the  public  mind. 

The  Kansas  Magazine. — After  the  wars  were  over,  and 
the  piping  times  of  peace  had  come,  and  the  sword  had 
been  shaped  into  a  pruning  hook,  the  literary  genius  of 
Kansas  was  mainly  devoted  to  exploiting  the  resources  of 


KANSAS  LITERATUEE.  303 

the  State.  Seldom  in  any  country  have  the  efforts  of  the 
land  agent  been  more  powerfully  aided  by  the  pen  of  the 
ready  writer.  Yet  it  was  in  these  days  that  appeared 
the  "Kansas  Magazine,"  the  most  brilliant  experiment  in 
our  literary  history.  The  "Kansas  Magazine"  secured  a 
corps  of  contributors  (without  money  and  without  price), 
the  larger  number  of  whom  were  Kansas  men  and  women ; 
and  much  that  was  written  referred  to  Kansas.  The  con- 
tributors who  secured  the  largest  number  of  readers  were 
John  James  Ingalls  and  "Deane  Monahan."  Both  held 
their  ascendency  through  the  same  charm — their  famil- 
iarity with  the  locality,  with  outward  and  visible  nature. 
Mr.  Ingalls  revealed,  as  it  had  not  been  before,  the  secret 
of  the  spell  of  natural  Kansas  over  the  hearts  of  her 
children.  "Deane  Monahan"  (Captain  James  W.  Steele) 
had  been,  before  his  magazine  days,  an  officer  in  the  regu- 
lar army  of  the  United  States,  had  been  stationed  at  posts, 
and  made  many  weary  marches  in  the  far  West.  He  made 
familiar  to  Kansas  readers  the  desert  earth  and  the  vast 
sky,  the  caiion  and  the  mesa,  of  New  Mexico.  It  is  prob- 
ably true,  until  he  wrote  of  it,  that  few  had  ever  seen  a 
picture  of  the  "Jornada  del  Muerto,"  the  "Journey  of 
Death." 

While  the  "Kansas  Magazine"  had  but  a  comparatively 
brief  existence,  it  made  a  lasting  literary  sensation. 
Bound  volumes  of  it  are  now  deemed  valuable,  and  odd 
numbers  are  eagerly  gathered  up. 

Two  Valuable  Books.— After  the  magazine  period,  ap- 
peared two  books  of  incalculable  value  to  Kansas : 
Wilder 's  "Annals  of  Kansas,"  and  Andreas'  "History  of 


304 


HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 


Wilder. 


Kansas ' ' — the  latter  known  to  Kansas 
people  by  a  much  more  commonplace 
name.  Neither  of  these  books  was 
written  with  any  attempt  at  literary 
excellence ;  they  are  merely  collections 
of  facts  and  figures.  The  ''Annals" 
represent  the  knowledge  and  industry 
of  one  Kansas  man;  the  "History" 
was  the  work  of  a  great  number  of 
persons.  They  form  in  Kansas  the 
basis  of  history.  So  complete  are  they  in  their  field  that 
Kansas  history  can  not  be  written  without  them. 

Local  Histories. — It  will  be  found  that,  in  the  brief 
time  allowed,  Kansas  has  celebrated  herself.  In  addi- 
tion to  the  "Annals"  and  the  "History"  already  men- 
tioned, there  have  been  written  many  local  histories.  In 
1876,  the  Centennial  year,  special  interest  was  manifested 
in  the  preservation  of  the  chronicles  of  Kansas  counties, 
and  many  volumes  were  written.  They  were  of  much 
present  interest,  and  will  serve  as  helps  and  guides  to 
future  annalists.  Most  valuable,  too,  are  the  biennial 
volumes  issued  by  the  State  Historical  Society.  They 
contain  what  may  be  called  history  at  first  hand,  the 
stories  of  actors  and  eye  witnesses.  In  these  are  supple- 
mented the  few  war  histories  written  by  Kansas  authors, 
as  Burke's  "Military  History  of  Kansas,"  Hinton's 
"Army  of  the  Border,"  and  Britton's  "Civil  War  on  the 
Border."  The  story  of  life  on  the  great  plains,  and  the 
mountains  beyond  them  has  been  told  in  the  volumes  of 
Colonel  Henry  Inman. 


KANSAS  LITEEATUEE. 


Poetry  of  Kansas. — Of  poetry,  Kansas  may  be  said  to 
have  produced  much.  No  great  epic  poem  has  yet 
appeared ;  no  single  song  with  the  assurance  of  being  sung 
forever,  but  much  of  graceful,  and  sometimes  of  inspiring 
verse,  which  has  been  preserved  and  cherished  as  the 
poet  has  been  faithful  in  two  things — to  life  as  it  is  in 
Kansas,  and  to  the  human  heart  as  it  is  everywhere.  This 
has  kept  in  mind  Mrs.  Allerton's  ''Walls  of  Corn,"  and 
Eugene  Ware's  ''Washerwoman's  Song."  Kansas  verse 
has  been  gathered  in  modest  volumes,  as  in  Miss  Horner's 
"Songs  of  Kansas,"  and  the  sheaf  of 
verses  by  members  of  the  State  Uni- 
versity called  "Sunflowers."  Nearly 
all  has  been  in  the  first  instance  given 
to  the  newspapers,  and  often  has  re- 
ceived no  more  permanent  form.  The 
t3nder  and  graceful  poems  of  the 
brilliant  Josie  Hunt,  published  in 
Kansas,  have  never  ceased  their  news- 
paper journey  in  nearly,  or  quite  Eugene  ware, 
forty  years.  The  poems  of  Richard  Realf — earliest  of 
Kansas  poets,  whose  life  was  a  tragedy — were  given,  with 
scarcely  a  .thought,  to  the  press.  Recently,  Richard 
Realf 's  friend  in  the  old  Kansas  days.  Colonel  Richard  J. 
Hinton,  has  gathered  up  the  poems  from  far  and  wide, 
and  given  them  to  readers  in  preservable  form. 

Kansas  poetry,  so  far  as  it  has  been  affected  by  Kansas, 
has  reflected  the  infinite  quiet  of  the  great  wide  land ;  of 
the  immense  blue  arch  of  heaven.  When  the  storm  and 
stress  of  the  first  days  is  remembered,  there  seems  to  be 
little  in  our  verse  of  the  stir  of  conflict,  and  the  ring  of 


306  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

steel,  or  the  gaiety  that  valor  knows.  An  exception  to 
this  rule  is  preserved  in  Wilder 's  "Annals,"  written  by 
an  unknown  hand.  It  will  be  understood  that  K.  T.-are 
the  initials  of  Kansas  Territory.  The  verses  originally 
appeared  in  the  long  deceased  periodical,  ''Vanity  Fair," 
in  September,  1861. 

K.  T.  DID. 

From  her  borders,  far  away, 

Kansas  blows  a  trumpet  call, 
Answered  by  the  loud  *' hurrah" 

Of  her  troopers,  one  and  all, 
''Knife    and    pistol,    sword    and    spur!" 

Cries  K.  T.— 
''Let  my  troopers  all  concur, 
To  the  old  flag,  no  demur — 

Follow  me!  " 

Hence  the  song  of  jubilee. 
Platyphillis  from  the  tree. 

High  among  the  branches  hid, 
Sings  all  night  so  merrily — 
"K.  T.  did, 
^She  did— she  did!" 

Thirty-score  Jayhawkers  bold, 

Kansas  men  of  strong  renown, 
Eally  round  the  banner  old, 

Casting  each  his  gauntlet  down. 
"Good  for  Kansas,"  one  and  all 

Cry  to  her; 
Riding  to  her  trumpet  call. 
Blithe  as  to  a  festival, 

All  concur! 

Hence  the  revel  and  the  glee, 
As  the  chanter  from  the  tree, 

High  among  the  branches  hid. 
Sings  all  night  so  merrily — 

"K.  T.  did, 

She  did— she  did!"'  ; 


state  University  Buildings. 


308  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

Kansas  Prose. — Kansas  has  contributed  in  many  ways 
to  what  may  be  called  the  literature  of  the  country.  Many 
Kansans,  going  abroad,  have  written  books  of  travel; 
many  books  have  been  written  on  social  questions,  mostly 
embodying  ''advanced  views,"  but  w^hat  may  be  termed 
the  literary  bent  of  the  State  has  been  in  the  direction  of 
sketch  writing,  newspaper  and  magazine  writing,  which, 
in  time,  may  grow  and  gather  into  books.  Of  course  the 
myriad-minded  Shakespeare  has  been  remembered.  Kan- 
sas has  produced  Wilder 's  "Life  of  Shakespeare"  and 
Randolph's  "Trial  of  Sir  John  Falstaff."  Both  treating 
the  great  dramatist  originally  and  profitably. 

No  Kansas  author  has  as  yet  written  a  great  or  standard 
work  on  any  subject,  for  the  reason  that  no  Kansas  writer 
has  yet  found  a  lifetime  to  devote  to  such  work.  A  large 
number  of  Kansas  writers,  usually  young  men  and  women, 
are  contributors  to  the  leading  magazines,  reviews  and 
literary  journals  of  the  country.  The  story-teller  is  the 
coming  man  in  Kansas ;  the  people  will  gather  about  him. 
Of  later  years,  among  those  who  have  attracted  attention 
may  be  mentioned  Edgar  W.  Howe's  "The  Story  of  a 
Country  Town";   the    newspaper    sketches    of    Harger, 

Since  Noble  Prentis  laid  down  his  pen  several  Kansas  writers  have 
come  into  prominence.  Among  them  is  Margaret  Hill  McCarter,  with  her 
charming  short  stories,  "The  Storv  of  a  Cottonwood  Tree,"  "Cuddy's 
Baby,"  and  "In  Old  Quivera."  William  Allen  White  has  written  "The 
Court  of  Boyville"  and  "Stratagems  and  Spoils,"  and  is  attracting  national 
as  well  as  state  attention  by  his  strong  magazine  articles.  Professor 
W.  H.  Carruth  has  given,  arnong  other  poems  of  exceptional  merit,  an 
"exquisite  literary  gem"  in  "Each  in  His  Own  Tongue."  and  Charles  M. 
Sheldon's  book,  "In  His  Steps,"  has  been  translated  into  German,  French, 
Welsh,  Swedish.  Norwegian,  Italian,  Spanish,  Armenian,  Bulgarian,  Rus- 
sian, Japanese,  Chinese,  Hindu,  Danish,  and  a  dialect  of  western  Africa. 

Some  interesting  books  of  travel  are  : 

W.  Y.  Morgan's  "Journeys  of  a  Jayhawker." 

F.  Dumont  Smith's  "Green  Waters  and  Blue." 

E,  W.  Howe's  "Daily  Notes  of  a  Trip  Around  the  World." 


KANSAS  LITEKATUEE.  309 

Morgan,  Albert  Bigelow  Paine,  and  William  Allen  White. 
The  widest  circulation  ever  attained  by  the  works  of  a 
Kansas  author,  has  been  by  the  stories  of  Rev.  Charles  M. 
Sheldon,  of  Topeka.  ''In  His  Steps"  and  the  succeeding 
volumes  have  been  sold  in  many  thousands,  and  trans- 
lated into  various  modern  languages.  These  books  are  of 
a  deeply  religious  character,  and  are  visions  of  the  "good 
time  coming."  Many  of  the  Kansas  men  and  women  are 
equally  facile  in  prose  and  verse,  and  it  is  remarked  that 
John  James  Ingalls,  whose  prose  illuminated  the  old 
"Kansas  Magazine"  and  has  been  an  attraction  to  Kan- 
sas readers  always,  has  w^ritten  the  most  perfect  single 
verse  in  Kansas  literature : 

OPPOETUNITY. 

Master  of  human  destinies  am  I; 

Fame,  love  and  fortune  on  my  footsteps  w'^ait. 

Cities  and  field  I  walk.     I  penetrate 

Deserts  and  seas  remote,  and,  passing  by 

Hovel  and  mart  and  palace,  soon  or  late, 

I  knock  unbidden  once  at  every  gate. 

If  sleeping,  wake;  if  feasting,  rise,  before 

I  turn  away.     It  is  the  hour  of  fate. 

And  they  who  follow  me  reach  every  state 

Mortals  desire,  and  conquer  every  foe 

Save  death;  but  those  who  hesitate 

Condemned  to  failure,  penury  and  woe. 

Seek  me  in  vain,  and  uselessly  implore. 

I  answer  not  and  I  return  no  more. 


BIOGRAPHY. 

James  H.  Lane. — In  his  lifetime,  the  year  and  place  of  the  birth  of 
James  H.  Lane  was  a  matter  of  controversy.  In  a  list  of  the  members 
of  the  Topeka  Constitutional  Convention  he  is  enrolled  as  a  native  of 
Kentucky,  thirty-three  years  of  age,  and  a  lawyer  by  professio.n.  He  was 
born  at  Lawrenceburg,  Indiana,  on  the  22d  of  June,  1814.  He  was  the 
son  of  Amos  Lane,  first  Speaker  of  the  Indiana  House  of  Representatives, 
and  a  judge  and  member  of  Congress  from  that  State.  His  mother  was 
of  an  old  and  honorable  New  England  family.  At  thirty  years  of  age  he 
enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  Third  Indiana  Volunteers,  to  serve  in  the 
Mexican  War.  He  was  promoted  to  the  colonelcy  of  the  regiment,  dis- 
played conspicuous  gallantry  at  Buena  Vista,  and  later  commanded  the 
Fifth  Indiana  Volunteers.  After  the  war  he  was  elected  Lieutenant- 
Governor  of  Indiana,  presidential  elector-at-large,  and  a  member  of  the 
Congress  which  passed  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Act,  for  which  he  voted, 

In  1855,  the  year  after  the  passage  of  that  Act,  he  came  to  Kansas  and 
to  Lawrence.  His  latest  biographer,  and  devoted  and  intimate  friend, 
Hon.  John  Speer,  speaks  thus  of  the  event : 

"One  bright  morning  in  April,  1855,  as  Lane  was  passing  with  his  team 
over  the  hill  where  the  State  University  now  stands,  he  halted  and  walked 
into  the  little  hamlet  now  called  Lawrence,  named  but  without  a  charter, 
carrying  a  jug  to  fill  with  water  to  pursue  his  journey  westward,  but 
meeting  a  man  named  Elwood  Chapman,  who  offered  to  sell  him  a  'claim,' 
he  purchased  and  ended  his  journey."  He  entered  the  town  which  was 
to  be  his  home  and  the  field  of  an  eventful  and  distinguished  career,  a 
Democrat  from  Southern  Indiana,  who  had  voted  in  Congress  for  the 
Kansas-Nebraska  act.  On  the  14th  of  August,  1855,  he  participated  in 
what  is  spoken  of  by  the  annalist  as  "the  first  convention  in  Lawrence 
of  Free  State  men  of  all  parties,"  and  from  that  time  forward  he  was 
what  he  later  avowed  himself,  "a  crusader  of  freedom."  Tireless,  inde- 
fatigable, alert,  full  of  audacity,  endless  in  plans  and  resources,  he  was 
everywhere — in  war,  in  peace,  in  combat,  in  diplomacy,  in  battle  and 
treaty.  He  was  early  an  advocate  of  the  "Topeka  Government,"  the  first 
organized  effort  for  the  admission  of  Kansas  as  a  Free  State.  He  was  a 
member  of  the  Free  State  Executive  Committee,  of  which  Charles  Robin- 
son was  chairman.  He  reported  the  platform  of  the  Big  Springs  Con- 
vention ;  he  was  president  of  the  Topeka  Constitutional  Convention. 
When  Kansas  appealed  to  the  North  he  became  a  national  character  ;  he 
was  called  "Jim  Lane,  of  Kansas."      In  April,   he  addressed   the  Legisla- 

310 


BIOGEAPHY.  311 

ture  of  Pennsylvania  at  Harrisburg  ;  in  May,  he  spoke  to  a  great  meeting 
in  Chicago,  where  $15,000  was  raised  for  Kansas. 

When  Kansas  became  a  State  of  the  Union,  he  was  elected,  after  a 
memorable  struggle,  one  of  the  first  United  States  Senators  ;  and  then 
came  the  great  Civil  War,  in  which  he  exhibited  that  strange  blending 
of  qualities,  capacities  and  dispositions  which  belonged  to  him  alone.  He 
raised  whole  brigades,  and  commanded  one  of  them  in  the  field,  even 
without  a  commission. 

In  1865  he  was  re-elected  United  States  Senator  almost  without 
opposition 

A  year  later,  as  a  Senator,  he  advocated  the  policy  of  President  John- 
son, and  broke  with  Kansas.  He  made  a  bold  fight  for  his  long  supremacy. 
It  seemed  at  times  that  he  would  win  it  back,  but  he  knew  at  last  that 
there  was  nothing  to  hope.  Those  who  knew  him  best  said  that  the 
thought  drove  him  to  madness  and  to  death. 

He  was  a  remarkable  man.  In  the  strange  power  of  his  speech  there 
has  been  no  other  like  him  in  Kansas.  He  made  many  enemies,  but 
attached  friends  to  himself  as  with  hooks  of  steel,  who  remember  him 
only  as  the  "Crusader  of  Freedom." 


Charles  Robinson  was  born  in  Hardwick,  Massachusetts,  July  21, 
1818.  He  came  of  that  New  England  generation  with  whom  life  is  a 
serious  and  strenuous  business,  an  exploration  into  all  the  bays  and  inlets 
of  thought  and  conviction.  His  lineage  is  traced  through  John  Robinson 
of  Plymouth  Rock  to  the  English  royal  line.  Charles  Robinson  revealed 
his  masterful  spirit  as  a  boy,  making  his  own  v/ay  through  Hadley  and 
Amherst  academies,  and  for  a  year  and  a  half  in  Amherst  College, 
Afterward  he  studied  medicine  and  began  professional  life  as  a  physician. 
But  he  was  destined  to  travels  and  adventures.  He  went  overland  to 
California,  crossing  the  site  of  Lawrence,  and  took  sides  there  in  a  con- 
test for  squatter's  rights,  which  involved  for  him  and  his  friends  some 
actual  fighting,  followed  by  imprisonment.  After  the  combat  was  over 
he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Legislature  from  the  Sacramento  district, 
and  is  honored  as  being  one  of  the  founders  of  the  free  state  of 
California. 

In  1851  he  returned  to  Massachusetts  and  resumed  the  practice  of 
medicine.     In  1854  he  became  interested  in  Kansas. 

Dr.  Robinson  entered  into  the  work  of  the  New  England  Emigrant  Aid 
Society  and  led  the  second  party  of  emigrants — the  first,  it  is  said,  who 
came  to  stay — to  the  Lawrence  town-site.  Thenceforward  he  was  a  part 
of  everything  that  went  on  in  Kansas  Territory.  He  was  a  great  believer 
in  the  power  of  reason,  in  the  virtue  of  the  New  England  practice  of 
"talking  it  over"  ;  nevertheless,  he  "dwelt  in  the  midst  of  alarms." 
During  the  "Struggle,"  as  we  have  learned,  his  home  was  burned,  his 
property  destroyed,  and  he  himself  arrested  and  held  for  months  a  pris- 
oner on  the  charge  of  treason,  yet  he  never  once  turned  his  back  to  the 
foe  nor   hesitated  in  his  performance  of  duty.     His  part  in   the  Topeka 


312  HISTORY  OF  KANSAS. 

movement  was  a  revelation  of  his  strengtti  in  leadership,  his  power  in 
control,  his  bravery,  and  his  keen,  sure  judgment  of  affairs. 

Under  the  Wyandotte  Constitution  he  became  the  first  State  Governor 
of  Free  Kansas.  In  1851,  Dr.  Robinson  married  Miss  Sara  T.  L.  Law- 
rence, who  accompanied  him  to  Kansas,  shared  all  the  perils  of  the  time 
and  hour,  and  became  a  very  clear  and  interesting  historian  of  the  events 
of  the  period. 

After  so  many  perils  past.  Governor  Robinson  found  himself  at  the 
head  of  the  State  in  the  midst  of  a  war  for  the  Nation's  life.  He  may 
be  said  to  have  armed,  equipped  and  sent  the  State  to  battle.  In  his 
message  to  the  Legislature,  he  showed  his  right  loyal  patriotism  by 
saying,  "Kansas,  though  last  and  least  of  the  States,  will  ever  be  ready 
to  answer  the  call  of  her  country." 

After  his  service  as  Governor,  the  name  of  Charles  Robinson  continued 
as  prominent  as  before  in  the  State.  He  was  sent  to  the  Legislature 
when  there  was  work  to  do.  One  of  the  trusts  he  executed  with  great 
kindness  and  fidelity  was  the  superintendency  of  the  Haskell  Institute, 
the  Indian  school  at  Lawrence. 

He  was  the  steadfast  friend  of  the  Kansas  State  University  ;  he  gave 
the  original  site ;  his  gifts  amounted,  it  was  estimated,  to  $150,000 ; 
and  he  made  the  University  his  final  heir  after  his  wife,  who  survives 
him.  The  Legislature  appropriated  $1,000  to  secure  his  marble  bust  for 
the  University. 

In  his  later  years  Governor  Robinson  resided  on  a  fine  farm  three 
miles  north  of  Lawrence,  dwelling  in  the  shade  of  noble  trees  which  he 
planted  with  his  own  hands.  Here  he  dispensed  a  grateful  hospitality. 
He  was  buried  at  Oak  Hill  Cemetery,  on  a  slope  which  faces  the  town 
which  he  saw  rise  in  the  prairie  grass,  and  pass  through  the  vicissitudes 
of  siege,  and  burning,  and  carnage,  to  well-ordered  peace  and  a  prosperous 
destiny  at  last. 


Governor  Carney. — Governor  Carney  was  born  in  Delaware  County, 
Ohio,  August  20,  1827.  He  came  to  Leavenworth  in  1858  and  became 
immediately  engaged  in  extensive  mercantile  business.  He  was  elected 
Governor  in  1862,  in  the  midst  of  the  Civil  War,  and  was  one  of  the 
Kansas  "War  Governors."  At  a  critical  period  in  the  financial  history 
of  the  State  he  pledged  his  private  fortune  to  preserve  the  public  credit. 


Samuel  C.  Pomeroy. — Samuel  C.  Pomeroy  died  at  Whitlnsville,  Massa- 
chusetts, August  27,  1891.  He  came  to  Lawrence  with  Dr.  Robinson 
and  the  "second"  company  in  1854  ;  was  active  in  promoting  Free  State 
immigration  to  the  Territory,  and  in  the  counsels  of  the  Free  State  party. 

His  first  residence  in  Kansas  was  at  Lawrence,  but  when  the  town-site 
company  of  Atchison  was  reorganized  on  the  basis  of  political  toleration, 
he  fixed  his  habitation  there,  was  active  in  the  affairs  of  the  young  city, 
and    in    1859   was    its    Mayor.      In    1860,    made    memorable    by    the    great 


BIOGRAPHY.  313 

drought,  when  the  Legislatuic  of  New  York  appropriated  $50,000  for 
Kansas,  and  every  Free  State  contributed  generously  in  money  and  goods, 
Mr.  Pomeroy  was  the  principal  distributing  agent  of  the  aid.  In  1861 
he  was  elected,  by  the  first  Legislature  of  the  State,  United  States 
Senator.  In  1867  he  was  re-elected  Senator  on  the  first  and  only  joint 
ballot.  He  was  prominent  and  powerful  in  -Kansas  affairs.  In  1873  his 
political  star  set  in  darkness,  and  he  was  defeated  for  re-election  to  the 
Senate.  He  was  a  native  of  Southampton,  Massachusetts,  was  born 
January  3,  1816,  and  was  seventy-five  years  old  at  the  time  of  his  death. 


Preston  B.  Plumb. — Preston  B.  Plumb  was  born  in  Ohio.  In  youth  he 
learned  the  printer's  trade,  read  law  in  that  State,  and  was  publishing  a 
newspaper  at  Xenia  when,  in  1856,  he  was  attracted  to  Kansas.  He 
made  a  preliminary  visit  to  the  Territory,  then  returned  to  Ohio,  and 
came  back  to  Kansas  with  a  party  of  twenty-eight  young  men,  of  which, 
though  but  eighteen  years  old,  he  was  chosen  Captain.  He  sought  work 
at  his  first  trade,  and  rose  to  be  foreman  of  the  "Herald  of  ITreedom"  oflSce 
at  Lawrence,  but  in  a  short  time  determined  to  go  farther  west  in  the 
Territory,  and  establish  a  town.  After  some  trials  the  town  started 
was  Emporia,  ever  afterwards  to  be  his  home.  Early  in  his  town- 
building  labors  he  was  called  away  by  the  war,  joined  the  Eleventh 
Kansas  regiment,  and  rose  to  be  its  Lieutenant-Colonel.  After  the  war 
was  over  he  went  back  to  the  Neosho  valley  and  began  his  labors,  as 
lawyer,  man  of  affairs,  promoter,  occasional  legislator,  and  builder  of  the 
new  country.  He  was  widely  known  in  Kansas,  though  not  as  an  office- 
holder, when  in  1877  he  was  elected  to  the  United  States  Senate,  to 
which  he  was  re-elected  in  1883  and  1889. 

He  was  blessed  by  Nature  with  a  strong  and  vigorous  frame,  .and, 
conscious  of  his  strength,  he  knew  no  rest.  In  Washington  and  at 
home,  he  was  constantly  at  work.  At  last  the  end  came  from  overwork. 
He  died  in  Washington,  December  20,  1891,  in  the  fifty-fourth  year  of 
his  age,  and  in  full  maturity  of  his  powers.  His  death  was  regarded  as  a 
great  loss  to  Kansas.  His  death  was  received  with  every  outward  demon- 
stration of  respect.  The  Capitol  at  Topeka  was  draped  in  mourning, 
while  the  remains  of  the  dead  Senator  lay  in  state  in  the  Senate  chamber, 
and  the  burial  at  Emporia  was  attended  by  many  thousands. 

In  November,  1896,  the  bronze  bust  of  Senator  Preston  B.  Plumb  was 
installed  in  the  Governor's  room  in  the  Capitol  at  Topeka,  the  gift  of 
his  widow. 


James  M.  Harvey. — Ex-Governor  Harvey  died  on  the  15th  of  April, 
1894,  near  Junction  City,  Kansas.  He  was  born  in  Monroe  County, 
Virginia,  but  removed  with  his  father's  family  to  Adams  County,  Illinois, 
and  thence  to  Kansas.  He  had  been  but  two  years  in  Kansas  when  the 
Civil  War  came,  and  he  entered  the  service  with  Company  G,  Tenth 
Kansas  Volunteer   Infantry,  a  regiment  which  furnished  eventually  a   re- 


314  HISTOKY  OF  KANSAS. 

markable  number  of  prominent  men  to  the  civil  and  oflacial  service  of  the 
State  and  Nation.  Captain  Harvey  displayed  in  the  ranks  of  the  Tenth 
the  steady,  patient  valor  which  was  native  to  him,  and  almost  Imme- 
diately on  his  return  to  his  home,  in  1865,  he  was  elected  to  the  Kansas 
House  of  Representatives,  and  again  in  1866.  In  1867  and  1868  he  was 
elected  to  the  State  Senate,  and  in  1868  was  elected  Governor  of  Kansas, 
and  re-elected  in  1870.  In  1874  he  was  chosen  to  fill  the  vacancy  in 
the  United  States  Senate  occasioned  by  the  resignation  of  Alexander 
Caldwell,  He  remained  in  the  Senate  until  March  4,  1877.  With  this 
brilliant  experience  of  official  life  he  might  have  been  encouraged  to  press 
on,  but,  instead,  he  retired  absolutely  to  private  life.  He  had  early  in 
life  added  to  the  calling  of  farmer  that  of  land  surveyor,  and  his  later 
years  were  devoted  to  the  hard  and  toilsome  occupation  of  a  government 
surveyor  in  New  Mexico  and  the  West.  Admonished  by  failing  health  of 
the  necessity  of  living,  if  he  would  live,  in  a  milder  climate,  he  sought 
tide-water  Virginia,  and  remained  in  the  neighborhood  of  Norfolk  for 
some  years  ;  but  moved  by  that  irresistible  impulse  which  often  comes  to 
men  at  last,  to  seek  their  home,  he  returned  to  Kansas,  and  near  the 
familiar  acres  he  had  redeemed  from  the  wilderness,  he  closed  his 
honorable  and  useful  life. 


Thomas  A.  Osborn. — Ex-Governor  Thomas  A.  Osborn  died  at  Mead- 
ville,  Pennsylvania,  on  the  4th  of  February,  1898.  He  was  born  at 
Meadville,  October  26,  1836.  He  learned  the  printer's  trade,  and  read 
law  in  Pennsylvania,  and  came  to  Kansas  Territory  in  1857.  On  his 
arrival  he  worked  first  at  his  trade,  in  Lawrence,  and  received  the  thanks 
of  the  editor  and  proprietor  of  the  "Herald  of  Freedom"  for  his  efficiency 
as  foreman  ;  afterwards  he  practiced  his  profession  at  Elwood,  Doniphao 
County.  The  bent  of  his  genius  lay,  however,  in  the  direction  of  politics, 
and  he  was  elected  from  Doniphan  County  to  the  State  Senate,  and  chosen 
president  pro  tem.  of  that  body.  In  1862  he  was  elected  Lieutenant- 
Governor.  In  1864  he  was  appointed  United  States  Marshal.  In  1872 
he  was  elected  Governor,  and  re-elected  in  1874.  In  1877  he  was  ap- 
pointed United  States  Minister  to  Chili,  and  in  1881  to  Brazil.  After  his 
return  fi'om  abroad.  Governor  Osborn  fixed  his  residence  in  Topeka,  and 
represented  Shawnee  County  in  the  State  Senate.  He  was  on  a  visit  to 
his  native  place  at  the  time  of  his  death.  Governor  Osborn  was  a  man 
of  winning  manners  and  distinguished  appearance,  one  of  the  most 
popular  of  the  public  men  of  Kansas.  His  funeral  at  Topeka  was 
attended  by  the  fast  diminishing  company  of  Kansas  Governors  and  a 
great  concourse  of  people. 


Franklin  G.  Adams  was  born  in  .Jefferson  County,  New  York,  May  13, 
1824,  and  died  in  Topeka,  December  2,  1899.  For  a  quarter  of  a  century 
he  was  secretary  of  the  State  Historical  Society.  He  early  espoused  the 
cause  of  the  anti-slavery  party,  was  a  strong  believer  in  the  prohibition 


BIOGEAPHY.  315 

of  the  sale  and  use  of  intoxicants,  and  he  was  an  avowed  supporter  of 
the  woman's  right  to  the  ballot.  Among  the  works  that  remain,  it  may 
be  recorded  that  he  was  the  prime  mover  in  establishing  county  normal 
institutes,  and  he  early  favored  industrial  training  and  the  teaching  of 
sciences  in  the  public  schools.  He  was  the  father  of  kindergarten  schools 
in  Topeka.  He  organized  the  State  Agricultural  Society,  now  the  State 
Board  of  Agriculture,  in  1862,  and  was  for  two  years  its  first  secretary. 
Judge  Adams  was  the  first  man  in  any  State  to  make  a  complete  collection 
of  local  newspaper  files  and  periodicals  for  Jiistoric  preservation.  In 
memory  of  him  the  State  Editorial  Association  has  placed  a  bronze  tablet 
on  the  walls  of  the  society's  rooms  in  the  State  House.  But  his  real 
monument  is  in  the  rare  and  valuable  collection  he  gathered  into  the 
State  Capitol,  and  in  the  history  his  strong,  beautiful,  blameless  life 
helped  to  shape. 


Noble  L.  Peentis  was  born  in  a  frontier  cabin  near  Mt.  Sterling, 
Brown  County,  Illinois,  April  8,  1839,  and,  while  visiting  his  daughter, 
died  July  6,  1900,  at  La  Harpe,  Illinois,  about  fifty  miles  from  his  birth- 
place. His  parents  were  pioneers  from  Vermont  and  both  died  of  cholera 
at  Quincy,  Illinois,  during  the  epidemic  of  1849.  The  son,  then  ten  years 
of  age,  returned  to  relatives  in  Vermont,  where  he  lived  for  about  eight 
years,  going  from  Vermont  to  Connecticut  to  learn  the  printer's  trade. 
Leaving  Connecticut,  he  returned  to  Illinois,  where  he  worked  in  a 
printing  office  at  Carthage.  Later  he  taught  school,  and  at  the  close  of 
one  term  of  school  enlisted  in  the  Sixteenth  Illinois  Infantry  at  the 
breaking  out  of  the  war.  In  this  company  he  served  until  he  was  mus- 
tered out  four  years  later.  After  the  war  he  edited  a  paper  in  Alexan- 
dria, Missouri,  and  another  in  Carthage,  Illinois.  In  1869  he  came  to 
Topeka  as  editor  of  the  "Topeka  Record."  He  was  induced  to  make  this 
change  by  Captain  Henry  King,  then  editor  of  the  "Topeka  Record,"  after- 
wards editor  of  the  "Topeka  Capitol,  "and  now  editor  of  the  "Globe  Demo- 
crat" in  St.  Louis.  His  subsequent  newspaper  connections  were  with  the 
"Topeka  Commonwealth"  with  T.  Dwight  Thacher,  the  "Lawrence  Journal" 
with  Floyd  P.  Baker,  the  "Junction  City  Union"  with  George  W.  Martin, 
again  with  the  "Topeka  Commonwealth,"  the  "Atchison  Champion"  with 
Governor  John  A.  Martin,  the  "Newton  Republican,"  and  the  "Kansas  City 
Star."  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  had  been  with  the  "Star"  ten  years. 
Of  his  voluminous  literary  products,  only  enough  to  make  five  books  have 
ever  been  put  into  book  form.  These  books  are,  "A  Kansan  Abroad," 
"Southern  Letters,"  "Southwestern  Letters,"  "Kansas  Miscellany,"  and  the 
"History  of  Kansas."  The  first  four  were  composed  of  letters  and  articles 
he  had  written  for  various  newspapers,  the  first  being  a  fascinating  series 
of  letters  from  Europe  written  in  1877.  Many  other  books  could  well  be 
compiled  of  his  lectures,  sermons,  addresses,  editorials  and  descriptive  arti- 
cles. Mr.  Prentis  was  a  good  listener,  an  omnivorous  reader  and  great 
observer.    He  forgot  nothing  that  he  ever  heard  or  read  or  saw.    His  mem- 


316  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

ory  was  marvelous,  but  this  did  not  prevent  the  work  of  his  pen  from  being 
at  all  times  strikingly  original.  His  talent  for  narrative  was  wonderful. 
His  sense  of  humor  was  unfailing,  and  he  was  in  every  way  a  remarkable 
conversationalist.  As  an  orator,  although  he  did  not  attempt  public 
speaking  to  a  considerable  extent  until  middle  life,  he  was  singularly 
powerful.  No  Kansan  was  ever  more  widely  loved  and  respected,  and  no 
one  could  have  been  better  fitted  to  write  the  State's  history. 

C.  S.  Gleed. 


John  James  Ingalls  was  born  in  Middleton,  Massachusetts,  Decem- 
ber 29,  1833,  and  died  at  Las  Vegas,  New  Mexico,  on  August  16,  1900. 
He  graduated  from  Williams  College  in  1855.  In  1858  he  came  to  Kansas 
and  settled  at  Sumner,  a  frontier  town.  Two  years  later  he  moved  to 
Atchison,  which  place  was  his  home  for  forty  years.  He  was  associated 
with  all  the  early  political  struggles  of  the  State.  For  eighteen  years, 
from  1873  to  1891,  he  represented  Kansas  in  the  United  States  Senate, 
serving  that  body  in  its  most  responsible  requirements.  In  the  absence 
of  a  Vice-President  he  was  made  President  of  the  Senate,  where  he  dis- 
tinguished himself  as  one  of  the  most  capable  presiding  oflBcers  the  body 
has  ever  known.  The  last  ten  years  of  his  life  were  spent  in  comparative 
retirement.  But  during  the  period  of  home-building  in  Kansas,  the  period 
of  Indian  raid  and  grasshopper  invasion,  the  time  of  marvelous  growth 
and  collapsing  boom.  John  James  Ingalls  stood  always  a  graceful  figure 
at  Washington,  defending  his  State  before  the  nation.  Oratory  was  his 
weapon,  and  he  was  a  force  to  be  reckoned  with  in  every  contest  in 
Congress,  a  power  to  be  feared  in  every  word-battle. 


Ex-Governor  L.  D.  Lewelling  died  suddenly  at  Arkansas  City  on  Sep- 
tember 3.  1900.  He  was  a  man  of  fine  personal  qualities  and  of  upright- 
ness of  character.  He  was  a  native  of  Iowa.  His  death  was  mourned  by 
a  wide  circle  of  friends  and  business  and  political  associates.  He  was 
elected  Governor  in  1892  and  served  two  years. 


Samuel  A.  Kingman. — Of  the  men  who  laid  the  foundation  stones  and 
erected  the  superstructure  of  Kansas,  none  deserves  more  from  posterity 
than  Samuel  A.  Kingman,  who  lived  to  see  the  practical  and  beneficial 
results  of  those  early  efforts.  At  the  time  of  the  Wyandotte  convention, 
Judge  Kingman  was  at  the  very  fullness  of  life,  having  been  born  June  26, 
1818,  at  Worthington,,  Massachusetts.  At  the  age  of  eighteen  he  started 
westward,  stopping  in  Kentucky,  where  he  studied  law,  served  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Legislature,  and  as  prosecuting  attorney,  and  finally  reached 
Kansas  in  the  year  1857,  locating  at  Hiawatha.  He  called  that  place  his 
home  until  1872,  when  he  moved  his  family  to  the  capital  city,  where  most 
of   his   life   in   the    State   was    spent.      Judge    Kingman    was   of   the   very 


BIOGKAPHY.       -  317 

beginning  of  Kansas,  serving  as  associate  justice  of  the  Supreme  Court 
from  1861  to  1865,  and  as  chief  justice  from  1867  to  1876,  when  ill  health 
caused  him  to  resign.     He  died  September  9,  1901. 


Rev.  Carl  A.  Swensson,  Ph.  D.,  president  of  Bethany  College,  Linds- 
borg,  McPherson  County,  died  at  Los  Angeles,  California,  February  16, 
1904.  He  was  buried  at  Lindsborg,  Tuesday,  February  23.  Doctor  Swens- 
son's  efforts  brought  Bethany  College  to  a  high  rank  among  the  institu- 
tions of  its  kind  in  the  United  States.  King  Oscar  of  Sweden  was  so 
impressed  by  Doctor  Swensson's  work  for  Swedes  in  America  that  he 
conferred  upon  him  the  Order  of  the  North  Star.  This  carries  with  it 
Swedish  knighthood. 


Governor  George  T.  Anthony  came  to  Kansas  after  the  close  of  the 
Civil  War,  in  which  he  served  as  a  captain  of  artillery.  It  was  in 
Kansas  that  he  entered  upon  a  public  career.  He  is  said  to  have  made 
his  first  public  speech  after  he  was  forty  years  old.  In  Kansas  he  was 
almost  continuously  entrusted  with  official  responsibilities.  He  was 
United  States  collector  and  president  of  the  State  Board  of  Agriculture, 
in  which  capacity  he  contributed  to  the  success  of  the  State  at  the 
Centennial  Exhibition  at  Philadelphia,  and  in  connection  with  George  A. 
Crawford  and  Alfred  Gray,  compiled  the  third  annual  report  of  that 
board,  said  by  competent  authority  at  the  time  to  be  the  finest  agricul- 
tural report  ever  published.  He  was  elected  Governor  of  Kansas  in  1876, 
serving  in  1877-79.  He  was  afterwards  Railroad  Commissioner,  and  at 
the  time  of  his  death  was  State  Insurance  Commissioner.  His  funeral 
occurred  in  the  State  Senate  Chamber  at  Topeka.  He  lived  seventy-two 
years. 


Governor  John  A.  Martin  served  in  the  Civil  War  as  Colonel  of  the 
Eighth  Kansas  Volunteer  Infantry,  and  commanded  the  First  Brigade, 
Third  Division,  Fourth  Army  Corps,  and  the  Third  Brigade,  First  Divi- 
sion, Twentieth  Army  Corps.  He  was  elected  Governor  in  1884,  and  again 
in  1886.  He  was  buried  with  military  and  civic  honors  of  the  most 
imposing  character  in  Mount  Vernon  Cemetery,  Atchison. 

Among  the  many  positions  of  honor  and  usefulness  occupied  by 
Governor  Martin,  was  for  years  that  of  member  and  Vice-President  of 
the  Board  of  Managers  of  the  National  Soldiers'  Home.  He  was  deeply 
interested  in  the  Nation's  provision  for  the  care  of  its  veteran  soldiers, 
and  his  counsel  and  effort  were  given  to  the  establishment  of  the  Western 
Branch,  which  was  located  near  Leavenworth,  and  has  grown  to  be  one  of 
the  finest  military  asylums  in  the  country. 


Francis  Huntington  Snow. — Francis  Huntington  Snow,  son  of  Benja- 
min and  Mary  Baldwin  Boutelle  Snow,   a  descendant  of  Richard  Warren 


318  HISTOEY  OF  KANSAS. 

and  Thomas  Rogers,  of  the  Mayflower  Company,  was  born  June  29,  1840, 
in  Fitchburg,  Massachusetts.  He  attended  the  Pltchburg  High  School 
and  graduated  from  Williams  College  in  1862.  He  entered  Andover 
Theological  Seminary  early  in  1864  and  graduated  in  1866,  receiving  at 
the  same  time  has  master's  degree  from  Williams.  He  served  two  seasons 
with  the  Christian  Commission  at  the  front  with  the  Union  army,  being 
present  at  Lee's  surrender.  In  1866,  on  the  recommendation  of  Governor 
Charles  Robinson,  he  was  appointed  professor  of  mathematics  and  natural 
science  in  the  just  opened  University  of  Kansas,  to  the  service  of  which 
his  entire  life  thereafter  was  given.  During  his  first  year  of  service  he 
preached  almost  every  Sunday  in  nearby  pulpits.  He  was  married  June  8, 
1868,  to  Jane  Appleton  Aiken.  In  1870  he  became  professor  of  natural 
history ;  in  1889,  president  of  the  faculties  ;  in  1890,  chancellor  of  the 
University  ;  and  on  his  retirement  in  1901,  professor  of  organic  evolution, 
systematic  entomology  and  meteorology. 

Professor  Snow  organized  in  the  middle  seventies  the  collecting  expedi- 
tions which  have  resulted  in  the  extensive  natural  history  museums  of 
the  University,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  first  scientific  publication  of 
the  University,  "The  Observer  of  Nature."  His  papers  are  to  be  found  in 
the  Reports  and  Bulletins  of  the  University  and  in  the  Proceedings  of  the 
Kansas  Academy  of  Science,  of  which  he  was  a  founder  and  president. 
For  some  years  he  was  an  editor  of  the  scientific  journal,  "Psyche." 
Throughout  his  connection  with  the  University,  Professor  Snow  made 
and  published  systematic  meteorological  reports.  In  1881  his  alma 
mater  conferred  upon  him  the  degree  of  doctor  of  philosophy,  and  in 
1890  he  received  from  Princeton  University  the  degree  of  doctor  of  laws. 
In  1885  the  Legislature  named  in  his  honor  the  new  Snow  Hall  of  Natural 
History.  In  1890  the  University  received  from  a  bequest  of  Dr.  Snow's 
uncle,  William  B.  Spooner,  the  funds  with  which  the  Spooner  Library 
and  the  Chancellor's  residence  were  erected.  Among  the  most  conspicuous 
of  Dr.  Snow's  services,  aside  from  his  work  as  instructor  and  executive, 
was  the  discovery  of  a  fungus  fatal  to  the  chinch-bug  and  of  methods 
for  its  propagation  and  distribution.  He  was  a  member  of  the  college 
fraternity  Delta  lUpsilon,  and  of  the  honorary  societies  of  Sigma  Xi  and 
Phi  Beta  Kappa.     He  died  at  Delafield,   Wisconsin,   September  21,    1908. 

William  Herbert  Carruth. 


Edmund  H.  Morrill. — Edmund  H.  Morrill,  of  Hiawatha,  Brown  County, 
thirteenth  Governor  of  Kansas,  was  born  at  Westbrook,  Cumberland 
County,  Maine,  February  12,  1834.  He  came  of  an  ancestry  that  for 
several  generations  had  been  prominent  in  New  England.  His  education 
was  secured  in  the  common  schools,  in  the  Westbrook  Academy,  and  in 
his  father's  shop,  where  he  learned  the  trade  of  tanning. 

Young  Morrill  at  the  age  of  twenty-three  went  to  Brown  County,  arriv- 
ing in  what  was  then  almost  a  wilderness,  in  March,  1857.  His  first  busi- 
ness venture  in  Kansas  was  in  the  building  of  a  sawmill ;    but  scarcely 


BIOGRAPHY.  319 

had  this  been  raised  to  a  profitable  basis  when  the  mill  was  destroyed 
by  fire,  leaving  the  young  proprietor  much  in  debt.  In  1860  came  the 
terrible  drought,  which  afliicted  all  Kansas  and  which  reduced  the  sturdy 
settlers  of  Brown  County  to  dire  straits  indeed.  Nothing  could  be  more 
pathetic  than  the  stories  Governor  Morrill  told  of  the  sufferings  of  the 
people  during  those  dark  days.  A  little  green  corn  during  the  summer 
and  a  little  ground  corn  during  the  winter  formed  the  chief  food  for 
everybody.  Naturally  a  benevolent  and  kind-hearted  man,  it  is  likely 
that  the  distress  which  young  Morrill  witnessed  during  this  season  was 
largely  instrumental  in  making  him  what  he  was — a  generous,  free-giving 
benefactor  of  the  poor.  When  the  war  broke  out  in  1861  he  answered 
his  country's  call  by  enlisting  as  a  private  in  Company  C  of  the  famous 
Seventh  Kansas  Cavalry. 

During  his  public  life,  he  served  the  State  in  various  oflSces  and  the 
Nation  as  Congressman.  Commencing  with  his  return  from  the  war. 
Governor  Morrill  was  in  the  real  estate  and  banking  business  at  his  home 
in  Hiawatha.  It  is  given  to  but  few  to  have  such  relations  with  a  whole 
community  as  those  which  existed  between  Governor  Morrill  and  his 
neighbors.  For  forty  years  he  was  the  confidential  adviser  of  hundreds 
of  people  who  went  to  him  with  their  problems  and  their  troubles.  Men 
have  gone  to  him  with  money  and  placed  it  in  his  hands  for  investment 
and  gone  away  and  stayed  away  for  years  without  even  asking  for  a 
receipt  to  indicate  his  stewardship.  Gaining  what  is  one  of  the  largest 
fortunes  in  the  State,  mostly  through  land  speculations  growing  out  of 
his  unbounded  confidence  in  the  future  of  his  region,  he  was  never  known 
to  oppress  a  poor  man,  betray  a  trust,  or  take  an  unfair  advantage.  In 
Hiawatha  he  was  the  leader  in  all  that  tended  to  improve  the  town.  He 
built  the  fine  academy  which  graces  the  hillside,  and  he  fostered  it  until 
now  it  is  one  of  the  best  endowed  institutions  in  the  West.  He  gave  the 
city  a  fine  library,  and  his  name  stood  first  on  every  church  and  other 
subscription  which  passed  among  the  people.  Himself  a  deep  reader  and 
a  lover  of  intellectual  attributes  in  whatever  form,  he  spent  with  prodi- 
gality in  the  cause  of  education,  and  no  joy  was  greater  to  him  than 
the  pleasure  of  helping  youth  to  learning.  The  family  home  in  the 
outskirts  of  Hiawatha,  amidst  a  fine  park  and  surrounding  fields,  has 
been  the  abiding  place  of  unpretentious  hospitality.  It  was  often  made 
the  gathering  place  of  the  townspeople  in  their  social  functions.  As  he 
passed  about  the  grounds  with  a  grandchild  on  either  shoulder,  pointing 
out  here  and  there  huge  trees,  which  as  slips  he  planted  with  his  own 
hands,  or  calling  affectionately  to  some  animal  among  the  many  in 
which  the  place  abounds,  or  telling  always  without  malice  a  rollicking 
story  of  politics  or  men,  one  could  go  deep  into  the  attributes  of  the 
greatest  work  of  God — an  honest,  friendly,  open-hearted.  Christian 
gentleman.  — Adapted  from  the  "Topeka  Capital." 


APPENDIX. 


THE  STATE  OF  KANSAS. 

ORIGIN  OF  NAME,   LOCATION  OF  COUNTY  SEAT  AND   DATE  OF 
ORGANIZATION  OF  EACH  COUNTY.^ 


Allen. — Organized  in  1855.  County 
seat,  lola.  Named  in  honor  of  Wil- 
liam Allen,  of  Ohio,  who  was  for 
many  years  a  member  of  the  United 
States  Senate  from  that  Common- 
wealth, and  also  its  Governor.  He 
favored  the  doctrine  of  popular  sov- 
ereignty on  the  opening  of  the  Terri- 
tory of  Kansas  to  settlement. 


I    /IQLA        La  : 


I 


Allen. 

AndePSOn.— Organized  in  1855. 
County  seat,  Garnett.  Received 
its  name  from  Jos.  C.  Anderson, 
of  Missouri,  who  was  a  member  of 
the  first  Kansas  Territorial  Legisla- 
ture, and  Speaker  pro  tern,  of  the 
House  of  Representatives. 

Atchison.— Organized  in  1855. 
County  seat,  Atchison.    Named  for 


Anderson. 


David  R.  Atchison,  a  Senator  from 
Missouri,  and  President  of  the 
United  States  Senate  at  the  date  of 
the  passage  of  the  Act  for  the  organ- 
ization of  the  Territory  of  Kansas. 
He  was  a  Pro- Slavery  Democrat,  and 
zealous  partisan  leader  in  the  discus- 
sions and  movements  affecting  the 
interests  of  slavery  and  its  attempted  establishment  in  the  new 
State  to  be  created. 


Atchison. 


*By  permission,  from  Admlre's  Political  Hand  Book  of  Kansas. 
&  Co.,  Topeka. 

3^1 


Crane 


322 


APPENDIX. 


Barbep.—O^anized  in  1873.  County 
seat ,  Medicine  Lodge .  In  honor  of  Thomas 
W.  Barber,  a  Free  State  settler  of 
Douglas  county,  who  was  killed  in 
consequence  of  the  political  troubles, 
near  Lawrence,  December  6,  1855. 
(The  county  was  originally  named  in 
the  statute  as  "Barbour,"  but  was 
corrected  by  special  act  of  the  Legis- 
lature in  1883.) 


Barber.. 


Barton.  —  Organized  in  1872. 
County  seat.  Great  Bend.  In  honor 
of  Miss  Clara  Barton,  of  Massachu- 
setts, who  won  great  distinction  during 
the  war  for  the  Union  by  her  remark- 


•  Holman       ivJoLji*^^  ^  ^ 
'".Berlin 
0-        Majena 

3S 

lakeside'    "^  J^^^ 

•  Rockfofd                 :T 

.  .;          Uauvuiy// 

PorterviUel         v/^\A 

s/    Sta.      1     : ., 

.■;G,alatia.v:;;  ■.■■■■.•;•,■;■.  ■ 

•  Vc. K 

'■■;:;■::;::■■;'■;.■.  •Millard 

--^..-■^ 

PA 

■/'•;'--'-xiW|i;^ 

\n-^>^^S^^^j 

'""^v^ 

-s- 

GREATBEND) 

A- 

_^P  PMlinwobd 

..urKW^^--- 

^^^?"^^T^^^ 

|i:_:_Xr<'l^"''''  K'-";k_____ 

■:■■■■>;■ 

'Barton. 

ably  effective  philanthropic  career  in 
the  sanitary  department  of  the  army. 

Bourbon.  —  Organized  in  1855. 
County  seat.  Fort  Scott.  Received 
its  name  from  Bourbon  county,  Ky., 
the    latter  having  been  one  of   the 


Bourbon. 

nine  counties  organized  in  1785  by 
the  Virginia  Legislature,  before  Ken- 
tucky became  an  independent  State. 
It  was  so  called  as  a  compliment  to  the 
Bourbon  dynasty  of  France,  a  prince 
of  that  family  (then  on  the  throne) 
having  rendered  the  American  colonies 
important  aid  in  men  and  money  in 
their  great  struggle  for  independence. 
Colonel  Samuel  A.  Williams,  a  native  of 


Brown, 


DESCKIPTION   OF   COUNTIES. 


323 


Bourbon  county,  Ky.,  was  a  member  of 
the  House  from  Fort  Scott  in  1855,  and 
it  was  at  his  request  that  the  county  was 
so  named.  He  was  mustered  in  as  Cap- 
tain of  Company  I,  Second  Kansas  Cav- 
alry, November  22,  1861,  and  resigned 
March  28, 1862.  He  died  at  his  old  home, 
Fort  Scott,  in  August,  1873^ 

Brown.— Organized  in  1855.  County 
seat,  Hiawatha.  After  0.  H.  Browne, 
of  Mississippi,  who  had  been  Senator 
and  member  of  the  House  of  Represen- 
tatives from  that  State,  was  United  States 
Senator  at  the  date  of  the  Act  organizing 
Kansas  Territory,  was  re-elected  for  six 

years  in  1859 


Butler. 


but  withdrew  with  Jeffer- 
son Davis  on  the  secession  of  the  South- 
ern States.  The  name  is  properly 
spelled  with  an  e  in  the  original  statute, 
but  on  the  county  seal  the  e  was  left 
off— accidentally,  probably.  All  later 
statutes  present  the  name  without  the 
final  e. 

Butler. — Organized  in  1855.  County 
seat,  Eldorado.  For  Andrew  P.  Butler, 
who  was  United  States  Senator  from 
South  Carolina,  from  1846  to  1857. 

Chase.— Organized  in  1859.  County 
seat,  Cottonwood  Falls.  Created  out  of 
portions  of  Wise  and  Butler  counties, 
and  named  in  honor  of  Salmon  P.  Chase,  successively  Governor  of 
Ohio,  United  States  Senator,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  and  Chief 
Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court.  In  the  Senate  he  was  earnest  in 
his  opposition  to  the  extension  of  slavery  into  Kansas. 


Chautauqua.— Organized  in  1875.  County  seat,  Sedan, 
out  of  a  portion  of  what  was  first  God- 
frey county,  named  after  "Bill"  God- 
frey, a  noted  trader  among'  the  Osages ; 
then  Howard  county,  in  honor  of 
Major-General  0.  0.  Howard,  for 
his  efforts  in  behalf  of  the  Union. 
Chautauqua  county,  N.  Y.,  was  the 
former  home  of  Hon.  Edward  Jaquins, 
a  member  of  the  Kansas  Legislature 
in    1875    from   Howard  county,  who 


Created 


Chautauqua. 


324 


APPENDIX. 


introduced  the  Bill  which  divided 
Howard  into  Chautauqua  and  Elk; 
hence,  from  his  native  place  this 
county  derives  its  name.  The  name 
orig-inally  given  (in  1855)  to  Howard 
county  was  Godfrey,  and  the  name 
was  changed  to  Seward  in  1861.  In 
1867  the  Legislature,  ignoring  former 
names,  created  the  county  of  Howard, 


Cherokee. 

which  embraced  all  the  territory  of 
Seward  and  a  five-mile  strip  additional 
on  the  west. 

Cherokee.  —  Organized  in  1866. 
County  seat,  Columbus.  First  named 
McGee  in  1855,  for  E.  McGee,  of  Mis- 
souri, who  was  a  member  of  the  Ter- 
ritorial Legislature.    In  1866  the  name 


Cheyenne. 


lil^l^v:;^^^8S?;M; 

■  :V-!-y;;V-;lJ^-^v>.'::Fanoy  0^ 

:•:•.■'•'  •■■.■■.■■.v^^i^Morgan  \'ille/.-;-;V:-'; 

■i,'cha;§;^^|-;^V^^^^^ 

\CJ^^v^v^^                                   ';':] 

IB0y^B^^^^ 

ii;;}:v;;::c:'Gdtesvijie:Sid'ii^;;:;;; 

■  ■'■:  ■^?ll^;:-/y:-'Wakef'ier41^ 

Cherokee  was  adopted,  from  the  fact  that 
a  large  portion  of  the  "Cherokee  neutral 
lands,"  reservation  of  that  tribe  of  Indians, 
w^as  included  in  the  geographical  area  of  the 
county. 

Cheyenne.— Boundaries  defined  in  1873. 
Organized  April  1,  1886.  County  seat,  St. 
Francis.  Named  after  the  Indian  tribe  of 
that  name. 


Clay.  —  Or- 
ganized in  1866. 
County     seat. 
Clay  Center. 
Named  in  honor 
^^^y-  of  the  distin- 

guished Kentucky  statesman,  Henry 
Clay,  who  was  chosen  United  States 
Senator  in  1806.  He  afterwards  served 
in  both  houses,  and  was  in  public  life 
most  of  the  time  during  a  period  of 
forty-six  years.  He  was  minister  to 
England  and  France,  and  candidate  for 


Clark. 


DESCEIPTION   OF   COUNTIES. 


325 


President  in  opposition  to  Polk.     He 
died  in  Washington  in  1852. 

Clapk.  —  Organized  May  5,  1885. 
County  seat,  Ashland.  Originally 
and  correctly  Clarke,  with  a  final  e, 
inmemory  of  Charles  F.  Clarke,  Cap- 
tain and  Adjutant-General,  United 
States  Volunteers,  who  died  at  Mem- 
phis, December  10,  1862. 

Cloud. — Organized   as    Shirley,  in 
1860.    County  seat,  Concordia.     The 
county  was 


Cloud. 


Coffey. 


Council.   Colonel  Coffey  died  at  Dodge 
City  in  1879. 

Comanche.  —  Organized  February 
27,  1885.  County  seat,  Coldwater. 
Named  from  the  Indian  tribe  of  that 
name .    The  county  was  first  organized 

in   the 


originally  named  after  Jane  Shirley 
of  Leavenworth.  The  name  w  as 
changed  to  Cloud  in  1867,-  in  honor 
of  Colonel  WilHam  F.  Cloud,  of  the 
Second  Regiment,  Kansas  Volun- 
teers. 

Coffey.— Organized  in  1859.  County 
seat,  Burlington.  Named  in  hoiior  of 
Col.  A.  M. 
Coffey,  a 
member  of 
the  first 
Territorial 
Legislative 


[l^.^  } 

Roejc^;/.-  ■•■■.■.•.■. v/6lengrouge.«/-".- 

^.;:y:;.;-Ati?^f^t^;:^;^-;.v^^^ 

|l>ytdaU  / 

■„.  -^Tilmo^^^^^^  -■ :  :c:  ';\:'-j%:'-  ■ 

v^  V 

'       \  ( 

'^^1  yC^.'^^:  s/'en,  ■-  •  -^y.  '■'■.\-:  ■[■. 

^=^^<^ 

I /                TisHaie  ■•'•'■'. v  ■  '■ '.    :H;.- .' 

K  1  r>=::5^ 

I*^,_^--^  *  "pS^EatonyV ■  ■•'.■■  1:  • 

'i;j7INFIELTr^'^S;,--V-;^   ■■•;;■l;■-■ 

'^  ii 

(/'V■^      I          >^^^N^„ser: 

-V     \j  / 

/O  J        r     A-'                   *^V  •' 

<t   -^f   \  r 

^             [jr  '"'""     ■    ■  TaussigV 

1'^ 

^^\j^.^;l^erdale*Maple  City;> 

Comanche. 


fall   of 

1873,  under  a  general  law  then  in 
force,  and  was  represented  in  the  Leg- 
islature under  that  organization  in 
1874;  but  that  organization  was  held 
fraudulent  and  void. 

Cowley.— Organized  in  1870.  County 
seat,  Winfield.  Named  in  honor  of 
Matthew  Cowley,  First  Lieutenant  of 
Company  I,  Ninth  Kansas  Cavalry, 
who  died  in  the  service  October  7, 
1864,  at  Little  Rock,  Ark.   The  county 


Cowley. 


326 


APPENDIX. 


was  originally  named  Hunter,  after 
R.  M.  T.  Hunter,  of  Virginia. 

Crawford.  —  Organized  in  1867. 
County  seat,  Girard.  This  county  was, 
by  an  Act  of  the  Legislature  of  1867, 
created  out  of  the  northern  half  of 
Cherokee,  which  prior  to  that  date 
reached  to  Bourbon.  It  was  named 
in  honor  of  Samuel  J.  Crawford,  who 


Crawford. 

was  elected  Governor  in  1864,  and 
served  nearly  four  years.  The  Legis- 
lature named  the  county  in  obedience 
to  a  resolution  passed  in  convention, 
held  to  petition  for  its  organization. 
Governor  Crawford  resigned  in  Octo- 
ber, 1868,  to  become  Colonel  of  the 
Nineteenth  Kan- 
sas Cavalry, 
specially  raised 
for  the  Indian 
war  of  1868-69. 


mm 

^eii  ar'  :Bluiff sii'l^i^pi^^fpp 

^v^phf 

^■i'^:''':':[^::^^^^ 

mm- 

;;:::»|^ 

:mf^M^sm<'Simm:^\ 

■■.■:.:-'--^-:'.-\':.':'.- 

/?.■:■:■■■■•::■:■■•'.■•  •  si'-'.\-  :.'.'■■'■':  ■':■  ■■'■■■'■■ 

■mS^ 

^i^siM0^^§^M 

'■'^^fiMMenvi 

uei'-/; ;  :*!*Rii'i'fe-^''?HW^^^^ 

W':-"""' 

""v:;^|;:p^^^p:-;^';vy 

,;   ,-.  ..SIlliilMhk'' 

Decatur. 


Dickinson. 


He  served  as  Captain  in  the 
Second  Kansas  Infantry,  and  was  Colonel  of  the 
Second  Regiment  Colored  Volunteer  Infantry, 
^during  the  war  for  the  Union. 

J  Decatur.— Organized  in  1879.  County  seat, 
Oberlin.  Boundaries  defined  by  legislative 
enactment    in     [=-,  1873.     Named  in 

honor   of   Com-    ij'''^^     '  modore    Stephen 
Decatur,   a  dis-    |ck.ud\\\^    tinguished Amer- 
ican naval  ofii- 
cer.    He  fell  in  a 
duel  with  Com- 


modore Barron,  United  States  Navy 
in  1808. 

Dickinson.  —  Organized  in  1857. 
County  seat,  Abilene.  In  honor  of 
Daniel  S.  Dickinson,  who  was  a  Sena- 
tor from  the  State  of  New  York.  In 
1847  he  introduced,  in  the  United 
States  Senate,  resolutions  respecting 


Doniphan. 


DESCKIPTION  OF   COUNTIES. 


327 


territorial  g'overnment,  embodying  the  doctrine  of 
opnlar  sovereignty,  afterwards  incorporated  in  the 
Bill  for  the  organization  of  Kansas 
Territory.     He  died  in  1866. 

Doniphan.  —  Organized  in  1855, 
County  seat,  Troy.  In  honor  of  Col. 
A.  W.  Doniphan,  of  Missouri.  He 
commanded  a  regiment  of  cavalry 
during  the  Mexican  War,  marching 
across  the  plains,  and  taking  a  very 
prominent     part     in    the    conquest 


of  New 
was    a 

san  in   the    effort  made   to   extend 

slavery  into  Kansas. 

Douglas.  —  Organized  in  1855. 
County  seat,  Lawrence.  In  honor  of 
Stephen  A.  Douglas,  United  States 
Senator  from  Illinois,  and  candidate 
for  the  presidency  in  1860.  As  a 
Senator,  Douglas,  in  1854,  took  a 
leading  part  in  seeming  the  adoption 

of   the 
'  pop- 


Mexico.     He 
zealous    parti- 


Edwards. 


ular  sovereignty"  principle  in  the  Act 
organizing  Kansas  Territory,  which 
^ave  the  particular  form  of  the  issue 
involved  in  the  Kansas  struggle. 

EdwaPds.  —  Organized  in  1874. 
County  Seat,  Kinsley.  Named  in 
honor  of  W.  C.  KdwMrds  of  Hutch- 


inson, 
AV   h    o 

built   the    first   brick   block   in   the 

county. 

Elk. — Organized  in  1875.  County 
seat,  Howard.  Created  out  of  the 
northern  portion  of  what  had  been 
Howard  county.  Named  for  the  Elk 
river,  which  traverses  its  area  from 
northwest  to  southeast.  (See  Chau- 
tauqua.) 

Ellis.— Organized  in  1867.  Hays  is 
the  county  seat.    Named  in  memory 


Eliis. 


338 


APPENDIX. 


of  Georg-e  Ellis,  First  Lieutenant  of 
Company  I,  Twelfth  Kansas  In- 
fantry, killed  in  battle  April  30, 1864, 
at  Jenkins'  Ferry,  Ark. 

Ellsworth.  —  Organized  in  1867. 
County  seat,  Ellsworth.  Named  after 
Fort  Ellsworth,  a  military  post  built 
on  the  bank  of  the  Smoky  Hill,  in 
1864.  This  fort  was  so  called  by 
General  Curtis,  in  honor  of  the  officer 


v-'.-v;;'.Wei.ight»'. '■.■.■•• 

RanclV-^/.V:v.-::'-::; 
'.■■',■.■.•.■  .■.•'■•Masnief',;: 

k^::::---i-^::-:-.->  ■'■■■'■■ 


Ellsworth. 


who  constructed  it,  Allen  Ellsworth, 
Second  Lieutenant  of  Company  H, 
Seventh  Iowa  Cavalry.  When  the 
name  was  adopted  for  the  county  it 
was  supposed  that  the  fort  had  been 
named  in  memory  of  Colonel  E.  E. 
Ellsworth,  of  national  fame. 

Ford.— Organized  in  1873.    County 


Ford. 


seat,  Dodge  City.  Named  in  honor 
of  Colonel  James  H.  Ford,  of  the 
Second  Colorado  Cavalry,  and  Brevet 
Brigadier-General  United  States  Vol- 
unteers. 

Franklin.  —  Organized  in  1855. 
County  seat,  Ottawa.  Named  in 
honor  of  the  illustrious  Benjamin 
Franklin. 

Finney.  —  Organized  in  1884. 
County  seat.  Garden  City.  Originally 
Sequoyah,  from  the  celebrated  Chero 


;v  ■Centropolis,  NorwoWli; ; ;  ':  TV^ellsviUe^ 

■■.' .HomewoddVB^-^w; ': 

'   \j^U'  Loupe- 

■^ToMawa 
OTTAWA                 : 

^"^^^ 

.-'!'.       ..     ^ 

PnL  luu 

;/kn)ivine-,::::y.\0:^ 

Lanc-d 

;^■^•..■•'.•  .■.'■.•.■•.•;■■.  Richmond 

V        .  7f 

Frankhn. 

kee  Indian  of  that  name,  the  inventor 
of  the  alphabet  of  his  language,  and 
a  most  remarkable  man.  Changed 
in  1883  to  Finney,  in  honor  of  D.  W. 
Finney,  then  Lieutenant-Governor  of 
the  State. 

Geary. — Organized  in  1855  as  Davis  county, 
which  name  was  given  for  Jefferson  Davis- 
United  States  Senator  and  Secretary  of  war — who 
became  President  of  the  Southern  Confederacy. 


Finney. 


DESCKIPTION   OF   COUNTIES. 


329 


The  Legislature  changed  the  name  to  Geary,  in  1889,  in  honor  of 
John  W.  Geary,  who  was  Territorial  Governor  of  Kansas  from 

1856  until  March,  1857.  County 
|:^'ar     I  seat,  Junction  City. 

a)*iiford|  Gove. — Organized  Septem- 
ber 2,  1886.  Gove  is 
the  county  seat.     In 

honor   of 

Captain 

Grenville 

L.  Gove, 

Eleventh 

Ka  n  s  a  s 

Cavalry, 

who  died 


•\-' 


(ieary. 


in  1864. 


Gove. 


Grant. 


Graham.  —  Organized  in  1880. 
County  seat.  Hill  City.  In  honor  of 
Captain  John  L.  Graham,  of  the 
Eighth  Regiment,  Kansas  Infantry — 
killed  in  action  at  Chickamauga, 
Tenn.,  September  19,  1863,  before  he 
was  mustered. 

Grant.  —  Organized  June  9,  1888. 
County  seat,  Ulysses.  Named  in 
honor  of  General  Ulysses  S.  Grant. 

Gray.  —  Organized  July  20,  1887. 
County  seat,  Cimarron.  Named  in 
honor  of  Alfred  Gray,  late  Secretary 
of  the  State  Board  of  Agriculture. 

Greeley.—  Or- 
ganized July  9, 
1887.  County 
seat.  Tribune. 
Named  in  honor 
of  the  founder  of 
the  New  York 
Tribune. 

Greenwood.— 
Organized  in 
1862.  County 
seat,  Eureka. 
This  county  re- 
ceived  its  name 

Gray. 


v°^ 

r-^U-^~'~ 

i^ 

V  £^ 

1 '  ^''^^^~~^^^^i>o-''^r 

'  1  ^^^^^. 

1       '  ^'^  ~~  ' 

^s^^ 

„, 

'o' 

i     ; 

-■r\-y-\ 

Montezuma 

^* 

:.;.;. Ego, 

Carmen  "S. 

330 


APPENDIX. 


•'•Underwood- 


Greeley. 


as  a  compliment  to  Alfred  B.  Greenwood, 
who,  about  the  time  of  the  organization 
of  the  Territory,  was  commissioner  of 
Indian  affairs.  He  negotiated  treaties 
on  the  part  of  the  United  States  with  the 
Sac  and  Fox,  and  other  tribes  in  southern 
Kansas. 

Hamilton.  —  Organized  January  29, 
1886.  County  seat,  Syracuse.  In  honor 
of  General  Alexander  Hamilton,  the  great 
American  statesman ;  he 
was  killed  in  a  duel 
with  Aaron  Burr, 
July  11, 1804. 

Harper.  —  Or- 

County    seat,    Anthony. 


ganized   in   1873. 

The  organization  of  this  county  was  one  of 
the. most  glaring  frauds  ever  perpetrated  in 
the  State.  Attorney- General  Williams,  in 
his  official  report,  says:  ''It  is  not  pretended 
that  Harper  county 
ever  had  an  inhabit- 
ant." The  form  of 
its  organization  was 
legal  on  paper,  and 


•Sshiloh^- 

-^^T^T^. 

W-:^ 

■ .  Stowe'l 

•■■.■,■ 

Federal* 

m 

■A 

^^^m 

m 

Wm 

'^ 

^5?^-^ 

•ft 

li 

JiHatton*^ 

11 

Greenwood. 


lamilton. 


SO  many  hours  he  would  be  dead;  the 
bet  was  taken,  and  Marion  Harper 
won. 

Harvey.— Organized  in  1872.  County 
seat,  Newton.  Named  for  James  M. 
Harvey,  Captain  of  Company  G,  Tenth 
Regiment  of  Kansas  Infantry,  and 
Governor  of  the  State  from  1869  to 
1873 .     In  January ,  1874 ,  he  was  elected 


that  is  all.  In  1878 
the  organization  became  legal.  The  county 
was  named  in  memory  of  Marion  Harper, 
first  Sergeant  of  Company  E,  Second  Regi- 
ment Kansas  Cavalry.  He  was  mortally 
wounded  at  Waldron,  Ark.,  December 
29,  1863,  and  died  the  following  day.  His 
comrades  say  he  took  his  death  coolly. 
When  brought 
in  wounded, 
he  proposed  a 
wager  that  in 


Harper. 


DESCKIPTION  OF   COUNTIES, 


331 


United  States  Senator  to  fill  an  unex- 
pired term  ending  m  1877. 

Haskell.— Organized  July  1,  1887. 
County  seat,  Santa  Fe.  Named  in 
honor  of  Dudley  C.  Haskell,  of  Law- 
rence, who  died,  while  serving   the 


Harvey. 

State  as  Congressman,  December  16, 
1883. 

Hodgeman.  —  Organized  in  1879. 
County  seat,  Jetmore.  Named  in 
honor  of  Amos  Hodgman,  Captain  of 
Company  H,  Seventh  Kansas  Cavalry. 
He  died'  October  16,  1863,  near  Ox- 
ford, Miss.,  of  wounds  received  in  an 


' 

r 

^^^r 

11.. 

\■,y^^ 

r?^"':] 

K,»iy 

l\. 

\  WW 

-^ 

a, 

''^^ 

Irf^ 

Hi 

nst<, 

'-*^ 

^   i 

w 

■\ 

JETMORE 

^ 

^ 

^ 

i 

f 

•  llcll, 

..nk 

i-'jiiii 

[■ton* 

■^y" 

V 

1' 

•  Mill- 

^ 

^ 

:;, 

Haskell. 

action  at  Wyatt,  Miss.,  October  10, 
1863.  The  name  should  be  spelled 
Hodgman  without  the  e  —  it  was  so 
spelled  in  the  original  statute  of  1868, 
which  created  tlie  county,  but  by 
accident  —  probably  —  in    the   statute  „  , 

which  defined  its  boundaries  in  1873  Hodgeman. 

the  e  was  inserted.  Of  course  it  is  legally  Hodgeman,  and  must  remain 
orthographically  incorrect  until  changed  by  legislative  enactment. 
Jackson. — Organized  in  1857.  County  seat,  Holton.  Originally 
Callioun,  in  honor 
of  John  C.  Cal- 
houn, of  South 
Carolina, changed 
in  1859  to  Jack- 
son ,  after  Andrew 
Jackson,  seventh 
President  of  the 
United  States. 

Jefferson.— 

Organized  in  1855. 
County  seat,  Oska- 
lo  jsa.  In  honor  of 
Thomas  Jefferson, 


Jacksoo. 


JeffersoDf 


332 


APPENDIX. 


North' : Branch. .;■.■■. ■;  ;■  .■:■■:■; •.-.: 

arnsbn;-\'''.-.v.  •.; 
^■^.Web■berVj^■•■■.■•.'•.•• 

:;:::Ry;^ns^vV?.:■•■: 

;.:.";:;:;'Loveweirs, 

':jDiMm\a::.::;:':':}:\y::^^ 

S^Teweil  city; '; ;  ; 

X':-:->:-:^'A  wins  •':'■;■                    ■=;,; 

third  President  of  the  United  States- 
author  of  the  Declaration  of  Inde- 
pendence. 

Jewell. — Organized  in  1870.  County 
seat,  Mankato.  Named  in  memory  of 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis  R.  Jewell, 
Sixth  Kansas  Calvary,  who  died  No- 
vember 30,  1862,  of  wounds  received 
in  the  battle  of  Cane  Hill,  Ark., 
November  28,  1862. 


Jewell. 

Johnson.— Organized  in  1855. 
County  seat,  Olathe.  Named  for  Rev. 
Thomas  Johnson,  who  in  1829  estab- 
lished a  mission  among  the  Shawnee 
Indians,    about 


^XTx:^ 

-— 

//aV\*Vo  ^  South  Park/  •    . 

/%9-V  ■•'r     ■  Merriam/  Olover 
T*  ■::-.-:V-^^Zarah    ./GiennO'    - 
^?°«<=«flo^LeT,exa/^:,  Hector,: 

pill 

Mith 

ip:!2^ 

^~-^Frs'^St!yley^: 

(.iarrhier^ 

^ 

"^  ^y';^;/'■;^■stjlhveii(^s'.■■; 

■y^dserton 

s^ng  uw:.'::;.;JlM;f:} 

Johnson. 


Kearny. 


commanded  United  States  troops  in 


eight  miles  south- 
west of  Kansas 
City.  Mr.  John- 
son took  the  Pro- 
Slavery  side  of 
politics,  and  was 
President  of  the  first  Territorial  Council, 
was  shot  and  killed,  in  January,  1865. 

Kearny.— Or-  " 
ganized  March 
27, 1888.  County 
seat ,  L  ak  i  n  . 
Named  after  Gen- 
eral Kearny,  who 


He 


%/  : 

\ 

staples*  - 

' 

— *-&     •    p 

""is^. 

;  •■.wCrescc-i]! 

^ 

:yM:-0-'My 

^. 

""-'^ 

Kingma 


the  West  during  the  Indian  troubles. 

Kingman.  —  Organized  in  1874. 
County  seat,  Kingman,  which  was 
named  in  honor  of  Samuel  A.  King- 
man, who  was  then  Chief  Justice  of 
Kansas. 


Kiowa. 


DESCRIPTION  OF   COUNTIES. 


333 


jith 


Kiowa.— Organized  March  23,  1886. 
County  seat,  Greensburg-.  Named  after 
the  Kiowa  Indians. 

Labette. — Leg-ally  organized  in  1867. 
County  seat,  Oswego.  Originally  part 
of  Dorn  county,  after  Colonel  Earl  Van 
Dorn,  of  the  regular  army  (he  was  also  a 
Confederate  officer) ,  but  changed  from 
Dorn  to  Neosho  in  1861,  after  name  of 
the  principal  river  in  southern  Kansas. 
Labette  county  has  a  peculiar  history, 
not  generally  known,  or  at  least  not 
found  in  the  books.  Prior  to  the  sum- 
l^l^^x^^  mer  of  1866  all  that  part  (and  being  the 

south  half)  of  Neosho  county,  now  com- 
prising Labette,  was  sparsely  populated. 
In  the  spring-  of  1866  there  was  a  great  rush 
of  immigration  to  that  locality,  and  the  new 
settlers  proceeded  to  organize  a  government 
of  their  own.  They  gave  the  name  Labette 
en  written  La  Bette),  and  called  a  con- 
vention, nominated  a  full  set  of  county 
officers,  and  a  representative  to  the  State 
Legislature,  and  elected  them  at  the  Novem- 
ber election,  and  started  a  county  govern- 
ment—for all  of  which  no  authority  of  law 
whatever  existed.  The  "Representative" 
so  elected  was  Charles  H.  Bent,  who  re- 
ported at  Topeka  with  a  petition^  "signed 
by  John  Gr.  Kice  and  224  other  citizens  of 
Labette  county,"  asking  that  Mr.  Bent  be 

admitted  to  a  seat  in  the  House.  He  was  admitted,  and  afterwards 
introduced  a  Bill  to  "organize  and  define  the 
boundaries  of  Labette  county,"  which  passed, 
and  was  approved   the  7th  of  February,  1867. 

Lane.— Organized  June  3, 1886.  Boundaries 
defined  in  1873.  County  seat,  Dighton.  In 
honor  of  Senator  James  H.  Lane,  of  Kansas. 

Leavenworth.— Organized  in  1855.     County 

seat,   Leavenworth.     From  Fort  Leavenworth,  the 

most  important  military  post  in  the  West.     It  was 

established  in  1827,  and  was  named  after  "Colonel 

Henry  H.  Leavenworth,  of  the  United  States  Army. 
LeavenwortL 


Lane. 


334 


APPENDIX. 


V      CeilroDYorktown  •"■.•■■. 
.1^.  ;;::;•;;:;■;•.  ■.•Paris; 

:.i.arnar^-^. 

Bacons'-        •Allameaa    .  :■ 

■■-■■-■■•   --^^ 

L-'-.r 

1 

Rosettc^C* 

Ovwi.rtli 

-*;y^'-^^^5v_ 

;^-:,;:  ^Pleasantyallrv' 

/            ^'^ 

V-X-^Orbitello-:  .^ 

?           ■ 

;:;  •.■.■.■:.■■:■■.:  Lone  Walnut 

fT..er  Springs:- 

:;-;v;:»itfargaret:;     ^  : 

A             ■-■:■■■■" 

Lincoln.  —  Organized  in  1870. 
County  seat,  Lincoln.  Named  in 
liondr  of  Abraham  Lincoln,  sixteenth 
President  of  the  United  States,  and 
author  of  the  emancipation  proclama- 
tion, who  was  assassinated  April  14, 
1865. 

Linn. — Organized  in  1855.  County- 
seat,  Mound  City.     Named  for  Lewis 


Lincoln. 

F.  Linn,  a  distinguished  United 
States  Senator  from  Missouri,  who 
died  in  1843,  in  office.  He  was  a 
colleague  of  Hon.  Thos.  H.  Benton. 

Logan. — Organized  September  17, 
1887.     County  seat,  Russell  Springs. 


Momimenj  . 

--^-7^ 

■/Oakley:- 

><^C>i ,-. , 

"r^^-^i^; 

y-^^"^--. 

J.KDSSELL  SPR'S'^    *  J 

^^^^^\^ 

1 

*Cl._«5^ 

\r^ 

Linn. 

By  an  Act  of  the  Legislature  in  1887,' 
the  name  of  the  then  unorganized 
county  of  St.  John  was  changed  to 
Logan,  in  honor  of  the  late  General 
John  A.  Logan. 

Lyon.— Organized  in  1860.    County 
seat,  Emporia. 


Named  by  the  first  Leg- 
islature, Breckinridge, 
in  honor  of  John  C. 
Breckinridge ,  United 
States  Senator  from 
Kentucky,  and  who  af- 
terward became  Vice- 
President  of  the  United 
States  in  1856.  Name 
changed  in  1862  to  Lyon, 
i  11  honor  of  General  Na- 
thaniel Lyon,  who  was 
killed  while  in  command 
of  the  Union  Army  at 


Marion. 


DESCEIPTION  OF  COUNTIES. 


335 


the  battle  of   Wilson's  creek,  Mis- 
souri, Augnst  10,  1861. 

Marion.  —  Organized  in  1860. 
County  seat,  Marion.  Named  for 
Marion  county,  Ohio,  which  ^Yas  so- 
called  in  memory  of  General  Francis 
Marion,  of  revolutionary  fame. 

Marshall.— Organized  in  1855. 
County  seat,  Marysville.    After  Gen- 


[^$^i 

e^^*^. 

p 

vv'V^^o'"'      ■- 

} 

/  ^ 

R..X 

\  • 

" ^ 

r   ^^ 

^ 

^"^^ 

X^ 

-  \ 

v-^        ^ 

■i^^   • 

\' 

1 11  1 

Sharps  Or^ 

f"    X ) 

^^« 

Y 

"  Jt 

5^   ,{,^^°Winnesheik-^ 

1    * 

7v 

S                     F 

■ 

MonitorV^ 

y 

(\ 

^^J 

1        In  man  y 

( "^^ 

)^ 

"Sc^vliu, 

vf.. 

L          /e^ 

■  ■ 

%^\K 

"■'^^^Mu 

mdSRidge 

N  v^ 

^ 

1  ,,l , 

ri^^_\. 

Aa 

Marshall. 

eral  Frank  J.  Marshall,  who  estab- 
lished a  ferry  on  the  Big  Blue  at  the 
crossing  of  the  old  Independence- 
( -alifornia  road  in  1849.  He  was  a 
prominent  member  of  the  first  Leg- 
islature, and  had  his  own  name  ap- 


McPherson. 

plied  to  the  county.  Marysville  was 
declared  the  permanent  county  seat  by 
the  Legislature  in  1860. 

MePherson.— Organized,  1870.  County 
seat,  MePherson.  In  honor  of  Major- 
General  James  B.   MePherson,   United 


Meade. 


States  Vohmteers,  who  was  killed  in 
battle  at  Atlanta,  Ga.,  July  22,  1864. 

Meade. — Organized  November  3, 
1885.  County  seat,  Meade.  Named 
in  honor  of  Major-General  Georp-e 
G.  Meade,  United  States  Army,  who 
died  in  1872. 

Miami. — Organized  in  1855  under 
the  name  of  Lykins.      County  seat, 


336 


APPENDIX, 


Paola.  In  honor  of  Dr.  David  Lykins, 
who  was  a  missionary  among"  the 
Miamis.  He  was  also  a  member  of 
the  first  Territorial  Council.  Name 
changed  in  1861  to  Miami,  after  the 
tribe  of  Indians. 

Mitchell.— Organized  in  1870. 
County  seat,  Beloit.  In  honor  of 
William  D.  Mitchell,  who  entered  the 


Mitchell. 


Union  army  as  a  private  in  Company  K, 
Second  Kansas  Cavalry;  was  promoted 
to  Captain  in  the  Second  Kentucky  Cav- 
alry, and  killed  March  10,xl865,  at  Mon- 
roe's Cross  Roads,  N.  C. 


Montgomepy.  —  Organized  in 
County  seat,  Independence.  Named  for 
Gen.  Richard  Montgomery,  born  in  Ire- 
land, December  2, 1736;  was  an  officer  of 


^uuVy 

I)«ight.^| 

1      r 

-'   ''            Bre"matl%^' 

,1 

1(        J 

h 

M                       i        1 

nVEr 

"^ 

-  ^__^~  '  ,    "^^41 

-              .    -                    ^. 

.    '^;.,^ 

Montgomery. 

distinction  in  the  British  Army:  re- 
signed and  settled  in  New  York  State 
in  1773;  was  appointed  one  of  the 
eight  Generals  to  command  the  Revo- 
lutionary army  of  America,  in  1775; 
was  killed  in  the  attack  on  Quebec, 
December  31,  1775,  shouting,  "Death 
or  liberty ! ' ' 


Morris. 


Moppis. — Organized  as  Wise  in 
1855.  County  seat.  Council  Grove. 
Originally  named  for  Henry  A.  Wise, 
who  was  Governor  of  Virginia  during 
the  John  Brown  seizure  of  Harper's 
Ferry.  The  execution  of  that  "grand 
old  man,"  at  Charlestown,  December 
2,  1859,  was  one  of  the  last  acts  of 
Wise's  administration.  Name  was 
changed  to  Morris  in  February,  1859, 
in  honor  of  Thomas  Morris,  a  United 


^'''_;  '■■-'■•■■''■■'/■'■■■f-n 

\        r^^""' ■'■■■■ 

:::V;V>::-:  ■        RT'IIP 

i^:m  ',       -^-^'-^  "'  "      ■ 

/                            -.         .                            .,;| 

i''i,;.:r"'".,;,M;! 

'mM^- 

^/"- '"'"'■'■■:■: 

W0::;. 

im«m 

:lii;i^ 

Morton. 


DESCKIPTION   OF   COUNTIES. 


337 


States  Senator  from  Ohio  in  1832,  who 
distinguished  himself  as  an  opponent  of 
slavery.     He  died  in  1844. 

MoPton.— Organized  November  18, 1886. 
County  seat,  Richfield.  Was  named  in 
honor  of  Honorable  Oliver  P.  Morton,  of 

Indiana. 

Nemaha.— 

Organized  in 
1855.  County 
seat,  Seneca. 
Named  from 
a  river  in  Ne- 
braska — ^  the 
Nemaha,  one 


^,W1'                   J     .Odense    J^ 

i^ljanute      /      '               //Stad. 

A    ^jAAtCTU  JC.J                             y  /        J 

/A.)  r      J    .              J     /Kinfbal 

1        Au 

Karl^on        =  \  tG/L^*^^^/ 

-     '      "H^  /)   \ 

\                    ftr      /StPaull 

/Tli.i\cr      VHi-rilia 

t-.Galesl)urA 

/v     c^ 

^Dennis         Lador^ 

£   iSout^  MoutK 

/.       '^ 

Neosho. 


and  changed  in  1861  to  Neosho,  after 
the  Neosho  river,  which  traverses  the 
county  from  northwest  to  southeast. 
The  name  was  given  to  the  river  by 
the  Osages. 

Ness.  — First  Organized  in  1873. 
County  seat,  Ness  City.  Disorganized 
in  1874;  reorganized  in  1880.  Named 
in  honor  of  Noah  V.  Ness,  Corporal 
of  Company  G,  Seventh  Kansas  Cav- 
alry, who 
diedAug. 


of  whose  branches  drains  the  northern 
half  of  the  county. 

N  e  o  sh  o .  —  Organized  in  1864. 
County  seat,  Erie.  The  county  was 
originally  named  Dorn  (see  Labette) , 


Ness. 


Norton. 


22,  1864, 

at  Abbey ville,  Miss.,  of   wounds  re- 
ceived in  action  August  19,  1864. 

Norton.— Organized  in  1872.  County 
seat,  Norton.  In  memory  of  Orloif 
Norton,  Captain  of  Company  L,  Fif- 
teenth Kansas  Cavalry,  killed  by  gue- 
rillas at  Cane  Hill,  Ark.,  October  29, 
1865.  In  1873  the  county  was  repre- 
sented by  one  N.  H.  Billings,  who,  in 
consequence  of  his  peculiarities,  be- 
came a  sort  of  butt  of  the  Legislature, 


338 


APPENDIX. 


A  member  of  the  Senate  at  the  time  had 
the  name  of  Norton  changed  to  BiUings, 
in  two  Hnes  hidden  in  a  paragraph  of  a 
Bill  fixing  the  boundaries  of  certain  coun- 
ties. The  next  Legislature  restored  the 
name  of  Nor- 
ton. 

Osage.— 

Organized 

as    Weller 

county    in 

1855 ;      name 

changed     to 

Osage     in 

1859.  Origi- 
nally named  for  John  B.  Weller,  of 
Ohio,  member  of  Congress,  and  Gov- 
ernor of  that  State ;  also  Governor  of 
California  and  Senator,  Minister  to 
Mexico,  etc.  The  name  Osage  comes 
from  the  Osage  river,  the  headwaters 
almost  the  entire  county.     Lyndon  is  the  county  seat 

Osbopne. 


MO 

% 

M 

%^||j|f| 

^S'  u 

M.iu 

il   Ayi 

/Oy 

f§% 

■  Deliverance 

■  Round  -   J^JV 

•rlj^'^^^viu 

Creek.; 

Mound 
Naloni;i 

•  Sta\ 

yc^'     f  Free  W 
n;a|.r-.    -.p„„e 

Ves:iii(     o 

ViuceuL.,         , 

rville>: 
Delhr 

w 

o' '■  ■  ■ 

,:  ;  ::  ;;X  Cheyen 

ne:   ■;.  : 

Osborne. 

^rs 

of 

which   stream 

drain 

Organized  in  1871.  County  seat,  Osborne.  Named 
in  honor  of  Vincent  B.  Osborne, 
Private  of  Company  A,  Second  Kan- 
sas Cavalry,  who  lost  his  right  leg 
January  17, 1865,  on  the  steamer ^n»*a 
Jacobs,  at  Joy's  Ford,, on  the  Arkan- 
sas river. 

Ottawa.— Created  in  1860,  and  or- 
ganized in'  1866.  Countj^  seat,  Min- 
neapolis, Named  for  the  tribe  of 
Ottawas. 

Pawnee.  — Organized    in    1872. 

County  seat,  Larned.    Named  for  the 
once  powerful  tribe  of   Pawnee  In- 
dians, the  area  of  this  county  having 
been  included  in  their  original  hunt- 
ing grounds. 

Phillips  .—Organized    in    1872. 
(!ounty   scat,  Phillipsburg.     Named 
in   memory    of   William    Phillips,   a 
Free-State  martyr,  murdered   September  1, 
1856,  in  Leavenworth. 

Pawnee. 


DESCRIPTION   OF   COUNTIES. 


339 


■•■.■.:■ '.Nance"  •■.-, 
Pleasant  Green ■ 
Crow; 


Phillips. 

Lieutenant  of  Company  D,  First  Kan- 
sas Infantry,  killed  in  action  August 
10,  1861,  at  Wilson's  creek,  Mo. 

Rawlins.—  Organized    in    1881 . 
County    seat,    Atwood.      Named    in 

memory 


Pottawatomie.— Organized  in  1856. 
County  seat,  Westmoreland.  Named 
for  the  Pottawatomie  Indians,  whose 
reservation  at  the  opening  of  Kansas 
Territory  for  settlement,  and  for  years 
afterward,  embraced  a  large  portion 
of  the  geographical  area  of  the  county. 

Pratt.— First  organized  in  1873. 
County  seat,  luka,  but  not  recognized 
in  consequence  of  frauds.  Pratt  is  now 
the  county  seat.  Organized  constitu- 
tionally in  1879.  Named  in  memory 
of  Caleb 
Pratt, 
Second 


■?NoraV«.J^.'»'"o.'i 


m-y^^-cf^ 


Pottawatomie. 


Gen.     John 

A.  Rawlins, 

who   was   a 

staff   ofi&cer 

of  General  Grant,  and  went  into  his 

cabinet,  when   elected  President,  as 

Secretary  of  War. 


Pratt. 

Reno.— Organized  in  1872.    County 
seat,  Hutchinson.      In    memory    of 


Rawlins. 

Jesse  L.  Reno,  Captain  United  States 
army,  and  Major-General  of  volun- 
teers, who  was  killed  in  battle.  Sept, 
14,  1862,  at  South  Mountain,  Md. 


Reao. 


340 


APPENDIX. 


tiyvi'arwick 

v;;:::-;.:^.:;:^-^,::;.:.-^ 

■ ,  Crai  n  V  i  1 1  eYX  ysJ  N  a  rk  a^^.  ■; 

■■-■  .    -■  ^-    -'^:-r.-^yr^::'--< 

/A  V' 

r»    ~\  \ 

•  Tia!;o         yTMunden. ■.■•■•  •■•i 

Rook~oV  1 

Sh  erda  h  1   -.  /  .y/^  ■. . .  •. .;  Ha  wort  h  ; 
L   BELLE  Y>A>''— N.=f^'- >^ 

>roiiin,al\ 

WisJ^fT^'  .;■;  cuba>C*.v ;.  ■: : 

x^"^ — 7 

TS^andil^.:  :\  ;:;■;::  ■'^■.•y/^ 

1               X-*^^  \yne>''^'  •  ■■  r  •  •  ■  .■ 

JNorwav./Lc-'  \  ■■    •   :  •  ■■.l:  ■■.•-■■. 

KacklV 

>..'■....   Tali\ioT^  AgendaX  ■; 

Republic. 


Republic.  —  Organized  in 
County  seat,  Belleville.  Received 
its  name  from  the  Republican  river, 
which  extends  through  the  county. 
The  river  was  so  called  because 
many  years  ago  the  valley  of  that 
stream  was  the  seat  of  the  "Pawnee 
Republic,"  a  designation  given  to  a 
principal  division  of  the  Pawnee  In- 
dians, or  Panis,  as  they  were  origi- 
nally known. 

Riee. — County  seat,  Lyons.  Named 
in  memory  of  Samuel  A.  Rice,  Brigadier- General  United  States 
volunteers;  killed  April  30,  1864,  at 
Jenkins'  Ferry,  Ark. 

Riley.— Organized  in  1855.  County 
seat,  Manhattan. 
Received  its  name 
from  the  adjacent 
military  post,  which 
w^as  established  in 
1853,  and  called 
Fort  Riley,  in  honor 
of  Genoral  Riley,  of 

the     United 

States  army. 

Rooks. 


Rice. 


Organized  in  1872.  County 
seat,  Stockton.  -In  memory  of  John  C. 
Rooks,  private  of  Company  I,  Eleventh 
Kansas  Infantry,  who  died  December  11, 
1862,   at   Fayetteville,  Ark.,  of   wounds 

received  ,  in    the    battle    of     Prairie 

Grove,  December  7,  1862. 

Rush. 


Rooks. 


Organized 
in  1874. 
County 
seat,  La- 
C  r  o  s  s  e  . 
In  memory 
of  Alexan- 
der Rush, 
Captain  of 
Company 
H,  Second 


l/"    Pleasant  Dale 


Rash. 


DESCRIPTION  OF  COUNTIES. 


341 


Colored  Infantry,  killed  April  3, 1864, 
at  Jenkins  Ferry,  Ark. 

Russell.  —  Organized  in  1872. 
County  seat,  Russell.  In  memory  of 
Alva  r.  Russell,  Captain  Company  K, 
Second  Kansas  Cavalry,  who  died 
December  12,  1862,  in  field  hospital 
near  Prairie  Grove,  Ark.,  of  wounds 
received  in  battle  December  7,  1862, 
at  Prairie  Grove. 

Saline.— Organized  in  1859.  County 
seat,  Salina.     Named  for  the  Saline 


Saline. 


river,  whose  waters  drain  a  large  area 
of  the  county. 

Scott.  -Or- 
ganized Jan- 
uary 29, 1886. 
Scott  is  the 
County  seat. 
Boundaries 
defined  in 
1873.  In  honor 


of  Major-General  Winfield  Scott,   United 
States  army,    hero  of  the  Mexican  war. 

Sedgwiek.  —Organized  in  1870.  County 
seat,  Wichita. 
In  memory  of 
John  Sedg- 
wick, United 
States  army, 
Major-Gen- 
eral of  volun- 
teers, killed  in 
battle.  May  9, 
1864,  at  Spott- 
sylvania,  Va. 

Sedgwick.  Sewapd.— 

Organized 

January  17,  1886.     County  seat.   Liberal. 

Boundaries  defined  in  1873.     In  honor  of 

Wm.   H.   Seward,    Governor   and   United 


;;;;i.p^nce;:v^op 

~__J 

''"""'0 

;■.■.■.-';''.:-.■:;;-.;.■•;:. 

Q    y^ 

'■['■'■'M  o'-.'.'-.'v.-  -^J^ 

'>0— 

mmi 

*>l  Basin 

■•■'■■■'.•'.■■■•^?Sr7^^^^^ 

H^ 
c' 

'■J^i^.  ■■■[■■  y'-:-:- 

•  Kneiid 

Scott. 


Seward- 


342 


APPENDIX. 


States  Senator  of  New  York,  and  Secre- 
tary of  State  under  Abraham  Lincoln. 

Shawnee.— Organized  in  1855.  County 
seat,  Topeka.  Was  carved  out  of  what 
was,  before  the  treaty  of  1854,  Shaw- 
nee Indian  lands — hence  the  name. 
General  H.J.  Strickler,  of  Tecumseh, 
who  was  a  member  of  the  council 
in  1855,  and  also  of  the  Joint  Com- 
mittee on  Counties,  claimed  Shawnee 


Shawnee. 


for  the  name  of  his  county,  a  prefer- 
ence stoutly  contended  for  by  the 
Reverend  Thomas  Johnson  for  the 
county  in  which  the  Legislature  was 
sitting,  but  the  committee  yielded  to 
General  Strickler,  and,  without  solici- 
tation, complimented  Mr.  Johnson  by 
conferring  his  own  name  upon  his 
county. 


Sheridan. 


Sheridan.— Organized  in  1880. 
County  seat,  Hoxie.  Named  in  honor 
of  Lieutenant  -  General  Philip  H. 
Sheridan,  United  States  army. 

Shepman.— Organized  September 
20, 1886.    County  seat,  Goodland.    In 


Sherman. 

honor  of  General  W.   T.   Sherman, 
United  States  army. 

Smith.— Organized  in  1872.  County 
seat,  Smitli  Center.  In  memory  of 
J .  NfdsonSmithjMajor  of  Second  Colo- 
rado Volunteers,  killed  October  23, 
1864,  at  battle  of  the  Little  Blue,  Mo. 

Stafford.— Organized  in  1879. 
County  seat,  St.  John.      In  memory 


WniiK^r,  ■"■    -•■■y          - 

Ohio     - . 

«I:.':l 

nM;,ll.           S*.Tw;;,*l 

■.■.'■'■• 

''■:■.<■V■-,,^^ 

1 

.4. 

''f.M  '>'''' 

.■.■•;■.  '.'All 

■^'sMITII  RENTER    . 

"^?^^Vv?;jr?^,;:.;. 

fe"''''"                   "f' 

■■■■/■'^ 

i|^i4-;-\-:v;Hlj 

DESCEIPtlON  OF  COUNTIES. 


343 


of  Lewis  Stafford,  Captain  of  Company  E, 
First  Kansas  Inf  antry  j  who  was  accidentally 
killed  at  Young's  Point,  La.,  January  31, 
1863. 

Stanton.  — Organized  June  17,  1887. 
County  seat,  Johnson.  This  county  was 
named  after  Edwin  M.  Stanton,  Secretary 
of  war  under  President  Lincoln. 


Stafford. 


Stevens.— Organized  August  3, 
1880.     County  seat,  Hugoton.     Was 


Stanton. 


named   after   the   late    distinguished 
statesman,  Thaddeus  Stevens. 

Sumner.-  Organized    in    1871 . 
County  seat,  Wellington.    In  honor  of 


;^crm,^^. 

■■■■:-^v:v''p^^ 

M^ 

• 

,('l;ir(ih- 

'"HUOOTON.      .' 

■.■;■'.•.■  Niagiiru* 

■,L;,n,y,. 

{,'■ 

Stevens. 

Charles    Sumner,    the    distinguished 
Massachusetts   Senator.      In    1854   lie 


Sumner. 

was  a  leader  in  the  opposition  to  ex- 
tension of  slavery  into  Kansas,  as 
proposed  in  the  Bill  to  organize  the 
Territory. 

Thomas.  —  Organized   October   8, 
,1885.     County  seat,  Colby.     In  honor 


Thomas. 


344 


APPENDIX. 


of  Major- General  George  H.  Thomas, 
United  States  army,  who  died  in  1870. 

Trego.— Organized  in  1879.  County 
seat,  Wakeeney .  In  memory  of  Edgar 
P.  Trego,  Captain  of  Company  H, 
Eighth  Kansas  Infantry,  killed  Sep- 
tember 19,  1863,  at  Chickamauga, 
Tenn. 

Wabaunsee. — Organized  as  Rich- 
ardson, in  1859.     County  seat,  Alma. 


Trego. 


The    county    was 
Colonel  "Dick" 
Richardson,     of 
Illinois,     for 
whom  the  county 


created    in   1855. 


was  first  named,  was  the  leader  in  the 
House  of  Representatives  on  the  Demo- 
cratic side  in  the  debate  on  the  Kansas- 
Nebraska  Bill.  In  February,  1859,  the 
name  was  changed  to  Wabaunsee,  that 

being     the 
name  of  a 
chief  of  the 
Pottawatomie 
Indians. 


Wabaunsee. 


Washington,— 

Organized  in  1860.  County  seat, 
Washington.  Named  in  honor  of 
George  Washington,  the  first  Presi- 
dent of  the  United  States. 


Washington. 


Wichita.— 

Organized 
December  24, 
1886.  County 
seat,  Leoti. 
Boundaries  defined  in  1873.  Wichita  was 
the  name  of  a  confederacy  of  Caddoan 
Indians. 

Wallace.— Organized  in  1888.  County 
seat,  Sharon  Springs.  Named  after  Gen- 
eral William  H.  S.  Wallace  of  Mexican 
War  fame.  Died  from  wounds  received  at 
Shiloh,  April  10,  1862. 

Wilson.— Organized    in    1865.      County 


-|:::Kc,p.e«;.-;:-,;^\w^.,^ 

inson      i 

^.r..:r^^^ 

St.  Thc■l•^■si^Y:^:7->y-^ 

■'V^.^ 

liB-M.£^ 

h^^vr?;^S:-',*^.v:-:v- 

"^"^^ 

:  ■    :-^^'^^i&mi. 

■" 

r^----,.^.  ■■:;:-•-::": 

''-^ 

L:.."^:-^^:^ 

--.,— 

1  •Conquest          ,Ly(iia  ■..■ 

•■''•■■'"'■'■' 

WichiU. 


DESCRIPTION  OF   COUNTIES, 


345 


seat,  Fredonia.  This  county  originally  extended  to  the  south  line 
of  the  State,  and  was  named  in  honor  of  Colonel  Hiero  T.  Wilson, 
who  lived  in  Ft.  Scott  from  September,  1843.  He  was  the  first 
white  person  to  settle  there. 


Wallace. 


Wilson. 


Woodson.— Organized  in  1855.  County  seat,  Yates  Center. 
Named  in  honor  of  Daniel  Woodson,  who  was  Secretary  of  the 
Territory,  and  for  some  time  acting  Governor,  after  the  resigna- 
tion of  Grovernor  Shannon,  in  1856. 

Wyandotte. — Organized  in  1855.  County  seat,  Kansas  City 
(formerly  Wyandotte) .  Named  after  the  Indian  tribe  of  that  name. 


Woodson. 


ORGANIC  ACT. 


ORGANIZATION  OF  KANSAS  TERRITORY. 


On  30th  May,  1854,  Congress  Passed  an  Act  Entitled  "An 
Act  to   Organize    the    Territories   of  Nebraska   and 

Kansas." 

The  Organic  Act  took  effect  on  its  approval,  30th  May,  and  on 
30th  June,  1854,  President  Pierce  appointed  officers  for  Kansas, 
as  follows:  Andrew  H.  Reeder,  of  Pennsylvania,  as  Governor; 
Daniel_  Woodson,  of  Virginia,  as  Secretary;  Andrew  J.  Isaacs, 
of  Louisiana,  as  United  States  District  Attorney;  Madison 
Brown,  of  Maryland,  as  Chief  Justice;  and  Saunders  W. 
Johnston,  of  Ohio,  and  Rush  Elmore,  of  Alabama,  as  Associate 
Justices.  Judge  Brown  refused  the  appointment,  and  Samuel  D. 
Lecompte,  of  Maryland,  was  appointed  Chief  Justice  on  3d 
October,  1854. 

The  first  eighteen  sections  of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Act  relate 
solely  to  the  Territory  of  Nebraska.  The  material  portions  of  the 
sections  of  said  Act  relating  to  Kansas  Territory,  are  as 
follows : 

§  1.  (Sec.  19.)  All  that  part  of  the  Territory  of  the  United 
States,  included  within  the  following  limits,  except  such  portions 
thereof  as  are  hereinafter  expressly  exempted  from  the  operations 
of  this  Act,  to-wit,  beginning  at  a  point  on  the  western  boundary 
of  the  State  of  Missouri,  where  the   thirty-seventh  parallel   of 

346 


ORGANIC  ACT.  347 

north  latitude  crosses  the  same;  thence  west  on  said  parallel  to 
the  eastern  boundary  of  New  Mexico;  thence  north  on  said 
boundary  to  latitude  thirty-eight;  thence  following  said  boundary 
westward  to  the  east  boundary  of  the  Territory  of  Utah,  on  the 
summit  of  the  Rocky  Mountains ;  thence  northward  on  said  summit 
to  the  fortieth  parallel  of  latitude;  thence  east  on  said  parallel 
to  the  western  boundary  of  the  State  of  Missouri;  thence  south 
with  the  western  boundary  of  said  State  to  the  place  of  beginning, 
be,  and  the  same  is,  hereby  created  into  a  temporary  government, 
by  the  name  of  the  Territory  of  Kansas;  and  when  admitted  as  a 
State  or  States,  the  said  Territorj^,  or  any  portion  of  the  same, 
shall  be  received  into  the  Union  with  or  without  slavery,  as  their 
constitution  may  prescribe  at  the  time  of  their  admission; 
provided,  tliat  nothing  in  this  Act  contained  shall  be  construed  to 
inhibit  the  Government  of  the  United  States  from  dividing  said 
Territory  into  two  or  more  Territories,  in  such  manner,  and  at 
such  times,  as  Congress  shall  deem  convenient  and  proper,  or  from 
attaching  any  portion  of  said  Territory  to  any  other  State  or 
Territory  of  the  United  States;  provided,  further,  that  nothing  in 
this  Act  contained  shall  be  construed  to  impair  the  rights  ot 
person  or  property  now  pertaining  to  the  Indians  in  said  Ter- 
ritory, so  long  as  such  rights  shall  remain  unextinguished  by 
treaty  between  the  United  States  and  such  Indians,  or  to  include 
any  Territory  which,  by  treaty  with  an  Indian  tribe  is  not,  with- 
out the  consent  of  said  tribe,  to  be  included  within  the  Territorial 
limits  or  jurisdiction  of  any  State  or  Territory;  but  all  such 
Territory  shall  be  excepted  out  of  the  boundaries,  and  constitute 
no  part  of  the  Territory  of  Kansas,  until  said  tribe  shall  signify 
their  assent  to  the  President  of  the  United  States,  to  be  included 
within  the  said  Territory  of  Kansas,  or  to  affect  the  authority  of 
the  Government  of  the  United  States  to  make  any  regulation 
respecting  such  Indians,  their  lands,  property,  or  other  rights,  by 
treaty,  law,  or  otherwise,  which  it  would  have  been  competent  to 
the  Government  to  make  if  this  Act  had  never  passed. 

§  2.     [Sec.  20  provides  for  the  appointment  of   a   Territorial 
Governor,  and  defines  his  powers  and  duties.] 

f  3.     [Sec.  21  provides  for  the  appointment  of  a  Secretary  of 
said  Territory,  and  defines  his  powers  and  duties.] 

^  4.  (Sec.  22.)  The  legislative  power  and  authority  of  said 
Territory  shall  be  vested  in  the  Governor  and  a  legislative 
assembly.  The  legislative  assembly  shall  consist  of  a  council  and  . 
house  of  representatives.  The  council  shall  consist  of  thirteen 
members,  having  the  qualifications  of  voters,  as  hereinafter 
prescribed,  whose  term  of  service  shall  continue  two  years.  _  The 
house   of   representatives   shall,   at   its   first   session,   consist  of 


348  APPENDIX. 

twenty-six  members,  possessing  the  same  qualifications  as  pre- 
scribed for  members  of  the  council,  and  whose  term  of  service 
shall  continue  one  year.  _  The  number  of  representatives  may  be 
increased  by  the  legislative  assembly,  from  time  to  time,  in  pro- 
portion to  the  increase  of  qualified  voters ;  provided,  that  the  whole 
number  shall  never  exceed  thirty-nine.     *    *    * 

[This  section  then  provides  that  the  Governor  shall  cause  a  cen- 
sus to  be  taken  before  the  first  election,  and  that  he  shall  make  an 
apportionment  declaring  the  number  of  members  of  each  house 
to  which  each  county  or  district  shall  be  entitled,  and  "the  first 
election  shall  be  held  at  such  time  and  places,"  and  the  first 
"legislative  assembly  shall  meet  at  such  place  and  on  such  day  as 
the  Governor  shall  appoint;  but  hereafter  the  time,  place  and 
manner  of  holding  and  conducting  all  elections,  and  the  appor- 
tioning the  representation  in  the  several  counties  or  districts  to 
the  council  and  house  of  representatives,  shall  be  prescribed  by 
Jaw,  as  well  as  the  day  of  the  commencement  of  the  regular  ses- 
sions of  the  legislative  assembly."] 

§  5.  [Sec.  23  prescribes  the  qualifications  of  persons  entitled  to 
vote  at  the  first  election,  which  persons  are  made  eligible  to  office 
at  such  first  election.] 

§6.  (Sec.  24.)  The  legislative  power  of  the  Territory  shall 
extend  to  all  rightful  subjects  of  legislation  consistent  with  the 
Constitution  of  the  United  States  and  the  provisions  of  this  act; 
but  no  law  shall  be  passed  interfering  with  the  primary  disposal 
of  the  soil;  no  tax  shall  be  imposed  upon  the  property  of  the 
United  States;  nor  shall  the  lands  or  other  property  of  non-resi- 
dents be  taxed  higher  than  the  lands  or  other  property  of  residents. 
Every  bill  which  shall  have  passed  the  council  anc[  house  of  rep- 
resentatives of  the  said  Territory  shall,  before  it  become  a  law,  be 
presented  to  the  Governor  of  the  Territory;  if  he  approve,  he 
shall  sign  it;  but  if  not,  he  shall  return  it  with  his  objections  to 
the  house  in  which  it  originated,  who  shall  enter  the  objections  at 
large  on  their  journal,  and  proceed  to  reconsider  it.  If  after  such 
reconsideration  two-thirds  of  that  house  shall  agree  to  pass  the 
bill,  it  shall  be  sent,  together  with  the  objections,  to  the  other 
house,  by  which  it  shall  likewise  be  reconsidered,  and  if  approved 
by  two-thirds  of  that  house  it  shall  become  a  law.  But  in  all  such 
cases  the  votes  of  both  houses  shall  be  determined  by  yeas  and 
nays,  to  be  entered  on  the  journal  of  each  house  respectively.  If 
any  bill  shall  not  be  returned  by  the  Governor  within  three  days 
(Sundays  excepted)  after  it  shall  have  been  presented  to  him,  the 
same  shall  be  a  law  in  like  manner  as  if  he  had  signed  it,  unless 
the  assembly,  by  adjournment,  prevent  its  return,  in  which  case 
it  shall  not  be  a  law. 


ORGANIC  ACT.  349 

§  7.  [Sec.  25  provides  for  the  appointment  of  township,  district 
and  county  oflB.cers.] 

§  8.  [Sec.  26  declares  that  no  member  of  the  legislative  assem- 
bly shall  hold  or  be  appointed  to  any  office  which  shall  have  been 
created,  or  the  salary  or  emoluments  ol  which  shall  have  been 
increased,  while  he  was  a  member,  during-  the  term  for  which  he 
was  elected,  etc.] 

I  9.  (Sec.  27.)  The  judicial  power  of  said  Territory  shall  be 
vested  in  a  supreme  court,  district  courts,  probate  courts,  and  in 
justices  of  the  peace. 

The  supreme  court  shall  consist  of  a  chief  justice  and  two  asso- 
ciate justices,  any  two  of  whom  shall  constitute  a  q^uorum,  and 
who  shall  hold  a  term  at  the  seat  of  government  of  said  Territory 
annually;  and  they  shall  hold  their  offices  during  the  period  of 
four  years,  and  until  their  successors  shall  be  appointed  and  quali- 
fied. The  supreme  court,  or  the  justices  thereof,  shall  appoint 
its  own  clerk,  and  every  clerk  shall  hold  his  office  at  the  pleasure 
of  the  court  for  which  he  shall  have  been  appointed. 

The  said  Territory  shall  be  divided  into  three  judicial  districts, 
and  a  district  court  shall  be  held  in  each  of  said  districts  by  one 
of  the  justices  of  the  supreme  court  at  such  times  and  places  as 
may  be  prescribed  by  law;  and  the  said  judges  shall,  after  their 
api)ointments,  respectively,  reside  in  the  districts  which  shall  be 
assigned  them;  and  each  of  the  said  district  courts  shall  have  and 
exercise  the  same  jurisdiction  in  all  cases  arising  under  the  Con- 
stitution and  laws  of  the  United  States  as  is  vested  in  the  circuit 
and  district  courts  of  the  United  States.  Each  district  court,  or 
the  judge  thereof,  shall  appoint  its  clerk,  who  shall  also  be  the 
register  in  chancery,  and  shall  keep  his  office  at  the  place  where 
the  court  may  be  held. 

The  jurisdiction  9f  the  several  courts  herein  provided  for,  both 
appellate  and  original,  and. that  of  the  probate  courts  and  of 
justices  of  the  peace,  shall  be  as  limited  by  law,  provided,  that 
justices  of  the  peace  shall  not  have  jurisdiction  of  any  matter  in 
controversy  when  the  title  or  boundaries  of  land  may  be  in  dis- 
pute, or  where  the  debt  or  sum  claimed  shall  exceed  one  hundred 
dollars;  and  the  said  supreme  and  district  courts,  respect! v^ely, 
shall  possess  chancery  as  well  as  common-law  jurisdiction. 

Writs  of  error,  bills  of  exception  and  appeal  shall  be  allowed  in 
all  cases  from  the  final  decisions  of  said  district  courts  to  the 
supreme  court,  under  such  regulations  as  may  be  prescribed  by 
law;  but  in  no  case  removed  to  the  supreme  court  shall  trial  by 
jury  be  allowed  in  said  court. 

Writs  of  error  and  appeals  from  the  final  decisions  of  said 
supreme  court  shall  be  allowed,  and  may  be  taken  to  the  supreme 


350  APPENDIX. 

court  of  the  United  States,  in  the  same  manner  and  under  the 
same  regulations  as  from  the  circuit  courts  of  the  United  States, 
where  the  value  of  the  property  or  the  amount  in  controversy,  to 
be  ascertained  by  the  oath  or  affirmation  of  either  party  or  other 
competent  witness,  shall  exceed  one  thousand  dollars,     *    *    * 

§10.  [Sec.  28  extends  the  provisions  of  the  "fugitive  slave 
acts"  of  1793  and  1850  to  Kansas  Territory.] 

J  11.  [Sec.  29  provides  for  the  appointment  of  a  United  States 
District  Attorney  and  a  United  States  Marshal  for  said  Territory.] 

§  12.  [SEC.SOprovidesthattheGovernor,  Secretary,  Chief  Justice 
and  Associate  Justices,  Attorney  and  Marshal,  shall  be  nominated 
and,  by  and  with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  senate,  appointed 
by  the  President  of  the  United  States,  and  for  their  qualifyin^^; 
fixes  the  salaries  of  the  Governor,  Judges,  Attorney,  Marshal,  and 
Secretary;  and  prescribes  the  compensation  of  members  of  the 
legislature.] 

§  13.  (Sec.  31.)  The  seat  of  government  of  said  Territory  is 
hereby  located  temporarily  at  Fort  Leavenworth,  and  such  por- 
tions of  the  public  buildings  as  may  not  be  actually  used  and 
needed  for  military  purposes  may  be  occupied  and  used  under  the 
direction  of  the  Governor  and  legislative  assembly  for  such  public 
purposes  as  may  be  required  under  the  provisions  of  this  act. 

§  14.  [Sec.  32  provides  that  a  delegate  to  the  house  of  repre- 
sentatives of  the  United  States  may  be  elected  by  the  voters 
qualified  to  elect  members  of  the  legislative  assembly;  declares 
the  first  Territorial  election  shall  be  held  at  such  time  and  places 
and  be  conducted  in  such  manner  as  the  Governor  shall  appoint 
and  direct;  but  all  subsequent  elections  shall  be  held  at  such  times, 
places  and  manner  as  shall  be  prescribed  by  law.  And  then 
follows  as  part  of  ^  32  the  famous  declaration  of  ' 'squatter  sover- 
eignty," (then  called  "the  great  principle  of  non-intervention,") 
as  follows: 

"The  Constitution  and  all  laws  of  the  United  States  which  are  not  locally- 
inapplicable  shall  have  the  same  force  and  effect  within  the  said  Territory 
of  Kansas  as  elsewhere  within  the  United  States,  except  the  eighth  section 
of  the  act  preparatory  to  the  admission  of  Missouri  into  the  Union, 
approved  March  6,  1820,  which,  being  inconsistent  with  the  principle  of 
non-intervention  by  Congress  with  slavery  in  the  States  and  Territories, 
as  recognized  by  the  legislation  of  1850,  commonly  called  the  compromise 
measures,  is  hereby  declared  inoperative  and  void— it  being  the  true 
intent  and  meaning  of  this  act,  not  to  legislate  slavery  into  any  Territory 
or  State,  nor  to  exclude  it  therefrom,  but  to  leave  the  people  thereof  per- 
fectly free  to  form  and  regulate  their  domestic  institutions  in  their  own 
way,  subject  only  to  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States;  provided,  that 
nothing  therein  contained  shall  be  construed  to  revive  or  put  in  force  any 
law  or  regulation  which  may  have  existed  prior  to  the  act  of  6th  of  March, 
1820,  either  protecting,  establishing,  prohibiting  or  abolishing  slavery." 


OKGANIC  ACT.  351 

I  15.  [Sec.  33  declares  that  money  shall  be  appropriated,  as  has 
been  customary,  for  the  erection  of  suitable  buildings  at  the  seat 
of  government,  and  for  the  purchase  of  a  library,  to  be  kept  at 
the  seat  of  government  for  the  use  of  the  Governor,  legislative 
assembly,  judges  of  the  supreme  court,  etc.] 

§  16.  [Sec.  34  reserves  sections  sixteen  and  thirty-six  in  each 
township  for  the  purpose  of  being  applied  to  schools  in  said  Ter- 
ritory, etc.] 

^  17.  [Sec.  35  relates  to  judicial  districts,  the  assignment  of 
judges,  fixing  terms  of  and  places  of  holding  courts,  etc.] 

§  18.  [Sec.  36  re(5[uires  all  officers  appointed  by  the  President, 
by  and  with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  senate  for  the  Territory 
of  Kansas,  to  give  security  for  moneys  that  maybe  entrusted  with 
them  for  disbursement.] 

§  19.  (Sec.  37.)  All  treaties,  laws  and  other  engagements 
made  by  the  Government  of  the  United  States  with  the  Indian 
tribes  inhabiting  the  Territories  embraced  within  this  act  shall  be 
faithfully  and  rigidly  observed,  notwithstanding  anything  con- 
tained in  this  act;  and  that  the  existing  agencies  and  superintend- 
encies  of  said  Indians  be  continued  with  the  same  powers  and 
duties  which  are  now  prescribed  by  laWj  except  that  the  President ' 
of  the  United  States  may,  at  his  discretion,  change  the  location  of 
the  office  of  superintendent. 

Approved  May  30,  1854. 


AK  ACT 


FOR   THE  ^ 


ADMISSION  OF  KANSAS  INTO  THE  UNION. 


Whereas  J  The  people  of  the  Territory  of  Kansas,  by  their  repre- 
sentatives in  convention  assembled,  at  Wyandotte,  in  said 
Territory,  on  the  twenty-ninth  day  of  July,  one  thousand  ei^-ht 
hundred  and  fifty-nine,  did  form  for  themselves  a  Constitution 
and  State  Government,  Republican  in  form,  which  was  ratified 
and  adopted  by  the  people  at  an  election  held  for  that  purpose 
on  Tuesday,  the  fourth  day  of  October,  one  thousand  eight 
hundred  and  fifty-nine,  and  the  said  convention  has,  in  their 
name  and  behalf,  asked  the  Congress  of  the  United  States  to 
admit  the  said  Territory  into  the  Union  as  a  State,  on  an  equal 
footing  with  the  other  States;  therefore. 

Be  it  enacted  hy  the  Senate  and  House  of  JRepresentatives  of  the 
United  States  of  America  in  Congress  assembled,  That  the  State  of 
Kansas  shall  be,  and  is  hereby  declared  to  be,  one  of  the  United 
States  of  America,  and  admitted  into  the  Union  on  an  equal  footing 
with  the  original  States  in  all  respects  whatever.  And  the  said 
State  shall  consist  of  all  the  territory  included  within  the  follow- 
ing boundaries,  to  wit:  Beginning  at  a  point  on  the  western 
boundary  of  the  State  of  Missouri,  where  the  thirty- seventh  par- 
allel of  north  latitude  crosses  the  same;  thence  west  on  said 
parallel  to  the  twenty-fifth  meridian  of  longitude  west  from  Wash- 
ington; thence  north  on  said  meridian  to  the  fortieth  parallel  of 
latitude ;  thence  east  on  said  parallel  to  the  western  boundary  of 

352 


ADMISSION  INTO   THE   UNION.  353 

the  State  of  Missouri;  thence  south  with  the  .western  boundary 
of  said  State  to  the  place  of  beginning;  provided  that  nothing 
contained  in  the  said  Constitution  respecting  the  boundary  of  said 
State  shall  be  construed  to  impair  the  rights  of  person  or  property 
now  pertaining  to  the  Indians  in  said  territory,  so  long  as  such 
rights  shall  remain  unextinguished  by  treaty  between  the  United 
States  and  such  Indians,  or  to  include  any  territory  which,  by 
treaty  with  such  Indian  tribe,  is  not,  without  the  consent  of  such 
tribe,  to  be  included  within  the  territorial  limits  or  jurisdiction  of 
any  State  or  Territory;  but  all  such  territory  shall  be  excepted 
out  of  the  boundaries,  and  constitute  no  part  of  the  State  of 
Kansas,  until  said  tribe  shall  signify  their  assent  to  the  President 
of  the  United  States,  to  be  included  within  said  State,  or  to  affect 
the  authority  of  the  Government  of  the  United  States  to  make  any 
regulation  respecting  such  Indians,  their  lands,  property,  or  other 
rights,  by  treaty,  law  or  otherwise,  which  it  would  have  been  com- 
petent to  make  if  this  Act  had  never  passed. 

Sec.  2.  And  be  it  further  enacted,  That  until  the  next  general 
apportionment  of  representatives,  the  State  of  Kansas  s^iall  be 
entitled  to  one  representative  in  the  House  of  Representatives  of 
the  United  States. 

Sec.  3.  And  be  it  further  enacted,  That  nothing  in  this  Act  shall 
be  construed  as  an  assent  by  Congress  to  all  or  any  of  the  propo- 
sitions or  claims  contained  in  the  ordinance  of  said  Constitution  of 
the  people  of  Kansas,  or  in  the  resolutions  thereto  attached;  but 
the  following  propositions  are  hereby  offered  to  the  said  people  of 
Kansas,  for  their  free  acceptance  or  rejection,  which,  if  accepted, 
shall  be  obligatory  on  the  United  States,  and  upon  the  said  State 
of  Kansas,  to  wit: 

First— Thsit  sections  numbered  sixteen  and  thirty-six,  in  every 
township  of  public  lands  in  said  State,  and  where  either  of  said 
sections  or  any  part  thereof  has  been  sold  or  otherwise  been  dis- 
posed of,  other  lands,  equivalent  thereto,  and  as  contiguous  as  may 
be,  shall  be  granted  to  said  State  for  the  use  of  schools. 

Second — That  seventy-two  sections  of  land  shall  be  set  apart  and 
reserved  for  the  use  and  support  of  a  State  University,  to  be 
selected  by  the  Governor  of  said  State,  subject  to  the  approval  of 
the  Commissioner  of  the  General  Land  Office,  and  to  be  appropri- 
ated and  applied  in  such  manner  as  the  Legislature  of  said  State 
may  prescribe  for  the  purpose  aforesaid,  but  for  no  other  purpose. 

Third — That  ten  entire  sections  of  ,land  to  be  selected  by  the 
Governor  of  said  State,  in  legal  subdivisions,  shall  be  granted  to 
the  said  State  for  the  purpose  of  completing  the  public  buildings, 
or  for  the  erection  of  others  at  the  seat  of  government,  under  the 
direction  of  the  legislature  thereof. 


354  APPENDIX. 

Fourth — That  all  salt  springs  within  said  State,  not  exceeding 
twelve  in  number,  with  six  sections  of  land  adjoining-  or  as  contig- 
uous as  may  be  to  each,  shall  be  granted  to  said  State  for  its  use, 
the  same  to  be  selected  by  the  Governor  thereof  within  one  year 
after  the  admission  of  said  State,  and  when  so  selected  to  be  used 
or  disposed  of  on  such  terms,  conditions  and  reflations  as  the 
legislature  shall  direct;  provided  that  no  salt  spring  or  land,  the 
right  whereof  is  now  vested  in  any  individual  or  individuals,  or 
which  may  be  hereafter  confirmed  or  adjudged  to  any  individual 
or  individuals,  shall,  by  this  article,  be  granted  to  said  State. 

Fifth — That  five  per  centum  of  the  net  proceeds  of  sales  of  all 
public  lands  lying  within  said  State,  which  shall  be  sold  by  con- 
gress after  the  admission  of  said  State  into  the  Union,  after 
deducting  all  the  expenses  incident  to  the  same,  shall  be  paid  to 
said  State  for  the  purpose  of  making  public  roads  and  internal 
improvements,  or  for  other  purposes,  as  the  legislature  shall  direct; 
provided,  that  the  foregoing  propositions  hereinbefore  offered  are 
on  the  condition  that  the  people  of  Kansas  shall  provide  by  an 
ordinance,  irrevocable  without  the  consent  of  the  United  States, 
that  said  State  shall  never  interfere  with  the  primary  disposal  of 
the  soil  within  the  same  by  the  United  States,  or  with  any  regula- 
tions congress  may  find  necessary  for  securing  the  title  in  said 
soil  to  hona  fide  purchasers  thereof. 

Sixth— And  that  the  said  State  shall  never  tax  the  lands  or  the 
property  of  the  United  States  in  said  State.  In  case  any  of  the 
lands  herein  granted  to  the  State  of  Kansas  have  heretofore  been 
confirmed  to  the  Territory  of  Kansas  for  the  purposes  specified  in 
this  act,  the  amount  so  confirmed  shall  be  deducted  from  the 
quantity  specified  in  this  act. 

Sec.  4.  And  he  it  further  enacted,  That  from  and  after  the 
admission  of  the  State  of  Kansas,  as  hereinbefore  provided,  all 
the  laws  of  the  United  States,  which  are  not  locally  inapplicable, 
shall  have  the  same  force  and  effect  within  that  State  as  in  other 
States  of  the  Union;  and  the  said  State  is  hereby  constituted  a 
judicial  district  of  the  United  States,  within  which  a  district  court, 
with  the  like  powers  and  jurisdiction  as  the  district  court  of  the 
United  States  for  the  district  of  Minnesota,  shall  be  established; 
the  Judge,  Attorney  and  Marshal  of  the  United  States,  for  the  said 
district  of  Kansas,  shall  reside  within  the  same,  and  shall  be  enti- 
tled to  the  same  compensation  as  the  Judge,  Attorney  and  Marshal 
of  the  district  of  Minnesota;  and  in  all  cases  of  appeal  or  writ  of 
error  heretofore  prosecuted,  and  now  pending  in  the  supreme  court 
of  the  United  States  upon  any  record  from  the  supreme  court  of 
Kansas  Territory,  the  mandate  of  execution  or  order  of  further 
proceeding  shall  be  directed  by  the  supreme  court  of  the  United 


ADMISSION  INTO   THE  UNION.  355 

States  to  the  district  court  of  the  United  States  for  the  district  of 
Kansas,  or  to  the  supreme  court  of  the  State  of  Kansas,  as  the 
nature  of  such  appeal  or  writ  of  error  may  require ;  and  each  of 
those  courts  shall  be  the  successor  of  the  supreme  court  of  Kansas 
Territory  as  to  all  such  cases,  with  full  power  to  hear  and  deter- 
mine the  same,  and  to  award  mesne  or  final  process  therein. 

Sec.  5.  And  be  it  further  enacted,  That  the  Judge  of  the  dis- 
trict court  for  the  district  of  Kansas  shall  hold  two  regular  terms 
of  said  court  annually  at  the  seat  of  government  of  the  said  State, 
to  commence  on  the  second  Mondays  of  April  and  October  in  each 
year. 

Approved  29th  January,  1861. 


Assent  of  State  to  Propositions  of  Congress. 

Chapter  6,  Laws  of  1862. 

Joint  Resolution  of  the  Legisi-ature  of   the    State   of  Kansas, 
Accepting  the  Terms  Imposed  by  Congress  Upon  the  Admis- 
sion OF  THE  State  of  Kansas  Into  the  Union. 

Be  it  resolved  by  the  legislature  of  the  State  of  Kansas,  That  the 
propositions  contained  in  the  act  of  congress,  entitled  "An  Act  for 
the  admission  of  Kansas  into  the  Union,"  are  hereby  accepted, 
ratified,  and  confirmed,  and  shall  remain  irrevocable,  without  the 
consent  of  the  United  States.  And  it  is  hereby  ordained,  that  this 
State  shall  never  interfere  with  the  primary  disposal  of  the  soil 
within  the  same  by  the  United  States,  or  with  any  regulations 
congress  may  find  necessary  for  securing  the  title  to  said  soil,  to 
bona  fide  purchasers  thereof;  and  no  tax  shall  be  imposed  on  lands 
belonging  to  the  United  States. 

Approved  January  20,  1862. 


CONSTITUTION   OF  THE  STATE 

OF  KANSAS. 


Adopted  AT  Wyandotte,  July  29, 1859.  Ratified  by  the  People, 
October  4, 1859.    Went  into  Operation,  January  29, 1861. 


With  all  Amendments  Adopted  Prior' to  January  1,  1899. 


Preamble. —Boundaries. 

We,  the  People  of  Kansas,  grateful  to  Almighty  God  for  our 
civil  and  religious  privileges,  in  order  to  insure  the  full  enjoyment 
of  our  rights  as  American  citizens,  do  ordain  and  establish  this 
Constitution  of  the  State  of  Kansas,  with  the  following 
boundaries,  to  wit:  Beginning  at  a  point  on  the  western  boundary 
of  the  State  of  Missouri,  where  the  thirty-seventh  parallel  of  north 
latitude  crosses  the  same ;  thence  running  west  on  said  parallel  to 
the  twenty-fifth  meridian  of  longitude  west  from  Washington; 
thence  north  on  said  meridian  to  the  fortieth  parallel  of  north  lati- 
tude ;  thence  east  on  said  parallel  to  the  western  boundary  of  the 
State  of  Missouri;  thence  south,  with  the  western  boundary  of  said 
State,  to  the  place  of  beginning. 


BILL  OF  RIGHTS. 

Section  1.  All  men  are  possessed  of  equal  and  inalienable 
natural  rights,  among  which  are  life,  liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of 
happiness. 

Sec.  2.  All  political  power  is  inherent  in  the  people,  and  all 
free  governments  are  founded  on  their  authority,  and  are  insti- 
tuted for  their  equal  protection  and  benefit.    No  special  privileges 

^'  356 


CONSTITUTION.  357 

or  immunities  shall  ever  be  granted  by  the  legislature,  which  may 
not  be  altered,  revoked,  or  repealed  by  the  same  body;  and  this 
power  shall  be  exercised  by  no  other  tribunal  or  agency. 

Sec.  3.  The  people  have  the  right  to  assemble  in  a  peaceable 
manner,  to  consult  for  their  common  good,  to  instruct  their  repre- 
sentatives, and  to  petition  the  Government,  or  any  department 
thereof,  for  the  redress  of  grievances. 

Sec.  4.  ^  The  people  have  the  right  to  bear  arms  for  their  defense 
and  security;  but  standing  armies,  in  time  of  peace,  are  dangerous 
to  liberty,  and  shall  not  be  tolerated,  and  the  military  shall  be  in 
strict  subordination  to  the  civil  power. 

Sec.  5.    The  right  of  trial  by  jury  shall  be  inviolate. 

Sec.  6.  There  shall  be  no  slavery  in  this  State  j  and  no  involun- 
tary servitude,  except  for  the  punishment  of  crime,  whereof  the 
party  shall  have  been  duly  convicted. 

Sec.  7.  The  right  to  worship  God,  according  to  the  dictates  of 
conscience,  shall  never  be  infringed;  nor  shall  any  person  be 
compelled  to  attend  or  support  any  form  of  worship;  nor  shall  any 
control  of,  or  interference  with  the  rights  of  conscience  be 
permitted,  nor  any  preference  be  given  by  law  to  any  religious 
establishment  or  mode  of  worship.  No  religious  test  or  property 
qualification  shall  be  re(j[uired  for  any  office  of  public  trust,  nor 
for  any  vote  at  any  election;  nor  shall  any  person  be  incompetent 
to  testify  on  account  of  religious  belief. 

Sec.  8.  The  right  to  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus  shall  not  be 
suspended,  unless  the  public  safety  requires  it  in  case  of  invasion 
or  rebellion. 

Sec.  9.  All  persons  shall  be  bailable,  by  sufficient  sureties, 
except  for  capital  offenses,  where  proof  is  evident  or  the  pre- 
sumption great.  Excessive  bail  shall  not  be  required,  nor 
excessive  fines  imposed,  nor  cruel  or  unusual  punishment  inflicted. 

Sec.  10.  In  all  prosecutions,  the  accused  shall  be  allowed  to 
appear  and  defend  in  person,  or  by  counsel;  to  demand  the  nature 
and  cause  of  the  accusation  against  him,  to  meet  the  witness  face 
to  face,  and  to  have  compulsory  process  to  compel  the  attendance 
of  witnesses  in  his  behalf,  and  a  speedy  public  trial  •  by  an 
impartial  jury  of  the  county  or  district  in  which  the  offense  is 
alleged  to  have  been  committed.  No  person  shall  be  a  witness 
against  himself,  or  be  twice  put  in  jeopardy  f©r  the  same  offense. 

Sec.  11.  The  liberty  of  the  press  shall  be  inviolate;  and  all 
persons  may  freely  speak,  write,  or  publish  their  sentiments  on 
all  subjects,  being  responsible  for  the  abuse  of  such  right;  and  in 
all  civil  or  criminal  actions  for  libel,  the  truth  may  be  given  in 
evidence  to  the  jury,  and  if  it  shall  appear  that  the  alleged  libelous 


358  APPENDIX. 

matter  was  published  for  justifiable  ends,  the  accused  party  shall 
be  acquitted. 

Sec.  12.  No  person  shall  be  transported  from  the  State  for  any 
offense  committed  within  the  same ;  and  no  conviction  in  the  State 
shall  work  a  corruption  of  blood  or  forfeiture  of  estate. 

Sec.  13.  Treason  shall  consist  only  in  levying-  war  against  the 
State,  adhering  to  its  enemies,  or  g-iving  them  aid  and  comfort. 
No  person  shall  be  convicted  of  treason  unless  on  the  evidence  of 
two  witnesses  to  the  overt  act,  or  confession  in  open  court. 

Sec.  14.  No  soldier  shall,  in  time  of  peace,  be  quartered  in  any 
house  without  the  consent  of  the  occupant;  nor  in  time  of  war, 
except  as  prescribed  by  law. 

Sec.  15.  The  right  of  the  people  to  be  secure  in  their  persons 
and  property  against  unreasonable  searches  and  seizures,  shall  be 
inviolate;  and  no  warrant  shall  issue  but  on  probable  cause,  sup- 
ported by  oath  or  affirmation,  particularly  describing  the  place  to 
be  searched,  and  the  persons  or  property  to  be  seized. 

Sec.  16.  No  person  shall  be  imprisoned  for  debt  except  in  cases 
of  fraud. 

Sec.  17.  No  distinction  shall  ever  be  made  between  citizens  of 
the  State  of  Kansas  and  the  citizens  of  other  States  and  Territo- 
ries of  the  United  States  in  reference  to  the  purchase,  enjoyment 
or  descent  of  property.  The  rights  of  aliens  in  reference  to  the 
purchase,  enjoyment  or  descent  of  property  may  be  regulated  by 
law. 

Sec.  18.  All  persons,  for  injuries  suffered  in  person,  reputation 
or  property,  shall  have  remedy  by  due  course  of  law,  and  justice 
administered  without  delay. 

Sec.  19.  No  hereditary  emoluments,  honors  or  privileges,  shall 
ever  be  granted  or  conferred  by  the  State. 

Sec.  20.  This  enumeration  of  rights  shall  not  be  construed  to 
impair  or  deny  others  retained  by  the  people ;  and  all  powers  not 
herein  delegated  remain  with  the  people. 


ARTICLE  1„ 

executive  department. 

Section  1.  The  executive  department  shall  consist  of  a  Gover- 
nor, Lieutenant-Governor,  Secretary  of  State,  Auditor,  Treasurer, 
Attorney- General  and  Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction;  who 
shall  be  chosen  by  the  electors  of  the  State  at  the  time  and  place 


CONSTITUTION.  359 

of  voting:  for  members  of  the  legislature,  and  shall  hold  their 
offices  for  the  term  of  two  years  from  the  second  Monday  of 
January  next  after  their  election,  and  until  their  successors  are 
elected  and  qualified. 

Sec.  2.  Until  otherwise  provided  by  law,  an  abstract  of  the 
returns  of  every  election  for  the  officers  named  in  the  foreg-oing- 
section  shall  be  sealed  up  and  transmitted  by  the  clerks  of  the 
boards  of  canvassers  of  the  several  counties  to  the  Secretary  of 
State,  who,  with  the  Lieutenant-Governor  and  Attorney-General 
shall  constitute  a  board  of  State  canvassers,  whose  duty  it  shall 
be  to  meet  at  the  State  capital  on  the  second  Tuesday  of  Decem- 
ber succeeding-  each  election  for  State  officers,  and  canvass  the 
vote  for  such  officers  and  proclaim  the  result;  but  in  case  any  two 
or  more  have  an  equal  and  the  highest  number  of  votes,  the  legis- 
lature shall,  by  joint  ballot,  choose  one  of  said  j)ersons  so  having 
an  equal  and  the  highest  number  of  votes  for  said  office. 


OF  THE  GOVERNOR. 

Sec.  3.  The  supreme  executive  power  of  the  State  shall  be 
vested  in  a  Governor,  who  shall  see  that  the  laws  are  faithfully 
executed. 

Sec.  4.  He  may  require  information  in  writing  from  the  officers 
of  the  executive  department  upon  any  subject  relating  to  their 
respective  duties. 

Sec.  5.  He  may,  on  extraordinary  occasions,  convene  the  legis- 
lature by  proclamation,  and  shall  at  the  commencement  of  every 
session  communicate  in  writing  such  information  as  he  may  pos- 
sess in  reference  to  the  condition  of  the  State,  and  recommend 
such  measures  as  he  may  deem  expedient. 

Sec.  6.  In  case  of  disagreement  between  the  two  houses  in 
respect  to  the  time  of  adjournment,  he  may  adjourn  the  legisla- 
ture to  such  time  as  he  may  think  proper,  not  beyond  its  regular 
meeting. 

Sec.  7.  The  pardoning  power  shall  be  vested  in  the  Governor 
under  regulations  and  restrictions  prescribed  by  law. 

Sec.  8.  There  shall  be  a  seal  of  the  State,  which  shall  be  kept 
by  the  Governor,  and  used  by  him  officially,  and  which  shall  be 
the  great  seal  of  Kansas. 

Sec.  9.  All  commissions  shall  be  issued  in  the  name  of  the 
State  of  Kansas,  signed  by  the  Governor,  countersigned  by  the 
Secretary  of  State,  and  sealed  with  the  great  seaL 


360  APPENDIXo 

Sec.  lOo  No  member  of  congress,  or  officer  of  the  State,  or  of 
the  United  States,  shall  hold  the  office  of  Governor,  except  as 
herein  provided, 

OF  THE  LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR. 

Sec.  11.     In    case    of  the    death,    impeachment,    resignation, , 
Temoval  or  other  disability  of  the  Governor,  the  power  and  duties 
of  the  office  for  the  residue  of  the  term,  or  until  the  disability- 
shall  be  removed,  shall  devolve  upon  the  president  of  the  senate. 

Sec.  12.  The  Lieutenant-Governor  shall  be  president  of  the 
senate,  and  shall  vote  only  when  the  senate  is  equally  divided. 
The  senate  shall  choose  a  president  ^9ro  tempore,  to  preside  in  case 
of  his  absence  or  impeachment,  or  when  he  shall  hold  the  office  of 
Governor. 

Sec.  13.  If  the  Lieutenant-Governor,  while  holding  the  office 
of  Governor,  shall  be  impeached  or  displaced,  or  shall  resign,  or 
die,  or  otherwise  become  incapable  of  performing  the  duties  of 
the  office,  the  presideilt  of  the  senate  shall  act  as  Governor  until 
the  vacancy  is  filled  or  the  disability  removed;  and  if  the  president 
of  the  senate,  for  any  of  the  above  causes,  shah  be  rendered  inca- 
pable of  performing  the  duties  pertaining  to  the  office  of  Governor, 
the  same  shall  devolve  upon  the  speaker  of  the  house  of  repre- 
sentatives. 


OTHER   STATE   OFFICERS, 

Sec.  14.  Should  either  the  Secretary  of  State,  Auditor,  Treas- 
urer, Attorney-General  or  Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction, 
become  incapable  of  performing  the  duties  of  his  office,  for  any 
of  the  causes  specified  in  the  thirteenth  section  of  this  article,  the 
Governor  shall  fill  the  vacancy  until  the  disability  is  removed,  or 
a  successor  is  elected  and  qualified.  Every  such  vacancy  shall  be 
filled  by  election  at  the  first  general  election  that  occurs  more  than 
thirty  days  after  it  shall  have  happened;  and  the  person  chosen 
shall  hold  the  office  for  the  unexpired  term. 


SALARIES   AND   OFFICIAL   REPORTS. 

Sec.  15.  The  officers  mentioned  in  this  article  shall,  at  stated 
times,  receive  for  their  services  a  compensation,  to  be  established 
by  law,  which  shall  neither  be  increased  nor  diminished  during 
the  period  for  which  they  shall  have  been  elected. 


CONSTITUTION.  361 

Sec.  16.  The  officers  of  the  executive  department,  and  of  all 
public  State  institutions,  shall,  at  least  ten  days  preceding"  each 
regular  session  of  the  legislature,  severally  report  to  the  Governor, 
who  shall  transmit  such  reports  to  the  legislature. 


ARTICLE  2. 

LEGISLATIVE. 

Section  1.  The  legislative  power  of  this  State  shall  be  vested 
in  a  house  of  representatives  and  senate. 

Sec.  2.  The  number  of  representatives  and  senators  shall  be 
regulated  by  law,  but  shall  never  exceed  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
hve  representatives  and  forty  senators.  From  and  after  the 
adoption  of  this  amendment  [November,  1873],  the  house  of 
representatives  shall  admit  one  member  for  each  county  in  which 
at  least  two  hundred  and  fifty  legal  votes  were  cast  at  the  next 
preceding  general  election ;  and  each  organized  county  in  which 
less  than  two  hundred  legal  votes  were  cast  at  the  next  preceding 
general  election  shall  be  attached  to  and  constitute  a  part  of  the 
representative  district  of  the  county  lying  next  adjacent  to  it  on 
the  east. 

Sec.  3.  The  rnembers  of  the  legislature  shall  receive  as  com- 
pensation for  their  services  the  sum  of  three  dollars  for  each  day's 
actual  service  at  any  regular  or  special  session,  and  fifteen  cents 
for  each  mile  traveled  by  the  usual  route  in  going  to  and  returning 
from  the  place  of  meeting;  but  such  compensation  shall  not  in  the 
aggregate  exceed  the  sum  of  two  hundred  and  forty  dollars  for 
each  member,  as  per  diem  allowance  for  the  first  session  held 
under  this  Constitution,  nor  more  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  dol- 
lars for  each  session  thereafter,  nor  more  than  ninety  dollars  for 
any  special  session. 

SeC;  4.  No  person  shall  be  a  member  of  the  legislature  who  is 
not  at  the  time  of  his  election  a  qualified  voter  of,  and  a  resident, 
in,  the  county  or  district  for  which  he  is  elected. 

Sec.  5.  _  No  member  of  congress  or  officer  of  the  United  States 
shall  be  eligible  to  a  seat  in  the  legislature.  If  any  person  after 
his  election  to  the  legislature,  be  elected  to  congress  or  elected  or 
appointed  to  any  of&ce  under  the  United  States,  his  acceptance 
thereof  shall  vacate  his  seat. 

Sec.  6.  No  person  convicted  of  embezzlement  or  misuse  of  the 
public  funds  shall  have  a  seat  in  the  legislature. 


362  APPENDIX. 

Sec.  7.  All  State  officers,  before  entering  upon  their  respective 
duties,  shall  take  and  subscribe  an  oath  or  affirmation  to  support 
the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  and  the  Constitution  of  this 
State,  and  faithfully  to  discharge  the  duties  of  their  respective 
offices. 

Sec.  8.  A  majority  of  each  house  shall  constitute  a  quorum. 
Each  house  shall  establish  its  own  rules,  and  shall  be  judge  of  the 
elections,  returns  and  qualifications  of  its  own  members. 

Sec.  9.  All  vacancies  occurring  in  either  house  shall  be  filled 
for  the  unexpired  term  by  election. 

Sec.  10.  Each  house  shall  keep  and  publish  a  journal  of  its 
proceedings.  The  yeas  and  nays  shall  be  taken  and  entered  imme- 
diately on  the  journal,  upon  the  final  passage  of  every  bill  or 
joint  resolution.  Neither  house,  without  the  consent  of  the  other, 
shall  adjourn  for  more  than  two  days,  Sundays  excepted. 

Sec.  11.  Any  member  of  either  house  shall  have  the  right  to 
protest  against  any  act  or  resolution;  and  such  protest  shall  with- 
out delay  or  alteration  be  entered  on  the  journal. 

Sec.  12.  Bills  may  originate  in  either  house,  but  may  be 
amended  or  rejected  by  the  other. 

Sec.  13.  A  majority  of  all  the  members  elected  to  each  house, 
voting  in  the  affirmative,  shall  be  necessary  to  pass  any  bill  or 
joint  resolution. 

Sec.  14.  Every  bill  and  joint  resolution  passed  by  the  house  of 
representatives  and  senate,  shall  within  two  days  thereafter  be 
signed  by  the  presiding  officers,  and  presented  to  the  Governor; 
if  he  approve,  he  shall  sign  it;  but  if  not,  he  shall  return  it  to 
the  house  of  representatives,  which  shall  enter  the  objections  at 
large  upon  its  journal  and  proceed  to  reconsider  the  same.  If 
after  such  reconsideration  two-thirds  of  the  members  elected  shall 
agree  to  pass  the  bill  or  resolution,  it  shall  be  sent  with  the 
objections  to  the  senate,  by  which  it  shall  likewise  be  reconsidered, 
and  if  approved  by  two-thirds  of  all  the  members  elected,  it  shall 
become  a  law.  But  in  all  such  cases  the  vote  shall  be  taken  by 
yeas  and  nays,  and  entered  upon  the  journals  of  each  house.  If 
any  bill  shall  not  be  returned  within  three  days  (Sunday  excepted) 
after  it  shall  have  been  presented  to  the  Governor,  it  shall  become 
i  law  in  like  manner  as  if  he  had  signed  it,  unless  the  legislature 
by  its  adjournment  prevent  its  return,  in  which  case  it  shall  not 
become  a  law.  If  any  bill  presented  to  the  Governor  contains 
several  items  of  appropriation  of  money,  he  may  object  to  one  or 
more  of  such  items,  while  approving  the  other  portion  of  the  bill; 
in  such  case  he  shall  append  to  the  bill,  at  the  time  of  signing  it, 
a  statement  of  the  item  or  items  to  which  he  objects,  and  the 
reasons  therefor,  and  shall  transmit  such  statement,  or  a  copy 


CONSTITUTION.  363 

thereof,  to  the  House  of  Representatives,  and  any  appropriations 
so  objected  to  shall  not  take  effect  unless  reconsidered  and 
approved  by  two-thirds  of  the  members  elected  to  each  house, 
and,  if  so  reconsidered  and  approved,  shall  take  effect  and  become 
a  part  of  the  bill,  in  which  case  the  presiding  officers  of  each 
house  shall  certify  on  such  bill  such  fact  of  reconsideration  and 
approval.    - 

Sec.  15.  Every  bill  shall  be  read  on  three  separate  days  in  each 
house,  unless  in  case  of  emergency.  Two-thirds  of  the  house 
where  such  bill  is  pending  may,  if  deemed  expedient,  suspend  the 
rules;  but  the  reading  of  the  bill  by  sections  on  its  final  passage, 
shall  in  no  case  be  dispensed  with. 

Sec.  16.  No  bill  shall  contain  more  than  one  subject,  which 
shall  be  clearly  expressed  in  its  title,  and  no  law  shall  be  revived 
or  amended  unless  the  new  act  contains  the  entire  act  revived,  or 
the  section  or  sections  amended,  and  the  section  or  sections  so 
amended  shall  be  repealed. 

Sec.  17.  All  laws  of  a  general  nature  shall  have  a  uniform 
operation  throughout  the  State;  and  in  all  cases  w^iere  a  general 
law  can  be  made  applicable,  no  special  law  can  be  enacted. 

Sec.  18.  All  power  to  grant  divorces  is  vested  in  the  district 
courts,  subject  to  regulation  by  law. 

Sec.  19.  The  legislature  shall  prescribe  the  time  when  its  acts 
shall  be  in  force,  and  shall  provide  for  the  speedy  publication  of 
the  same;  and  no  law  of  a  general  nature  shall  be  in  force  until 
the  same  be  published.  It  shall  have  the  power  to  provide  for 
the  election  or  appointment  of  all  officers,  and  the  filling  of  all 
vacancies  not  otherwise  provided  for  in  the  Constitution. 

Sec.  20.  The  enacting  clause  of  all  laws  shall  be, "Be  it  enacted 
by  the  legislature  of  the  State  of  Kansas;"  and  no  law  shall  be 
enacted  except  by  bill. 

Sec.  21.  The  legislature  may  confer  upon  tribunals  transacting 
the  county  business  of  the  several  counties,  such  powers  of  local 
legislation  and  administration  as  it  shall  deem  expedient. 

Sec.  22.  For  any  speech  or  debate  in  either  house  the  members 
shall  not  be  questioned  elsewhere.  No  member  of  the  legislature 
shall  be  subject  to  arrest — except  for  felony  or  breach  of  the 
peace — in  going  to,  or  returning  from,  the  place  of  meeting,^  or 
during  the  continuance  of  the  session;  neither  shall  he  be  subject 
to  the  service  of  any  civil  process  during  the  session,  nor  for 
fifteen  days  previous  to  its  commencement. 

Sec.  23.  The  legislature,  in  providing  for  the  formation  and 
regulation  of  schools,  shall  make  no  distinction  between  the  rights 
of  males  and  females. 


364  »  APPENDIX. 

Sec.  24.  No  money  shall  be  drawn  from  the  treasury,  except  in 
pursuance  of  a  specific  appropriation  made  by  law,  and  no  appro- 
priation shall  be  for  a  longer  term  than  two  years. 

Sec.  25.  All  sessions  of  the  legislature  shall  be  held  at  the 
State  capital,  and  beginning  with  the  session  of  eighteen  hundred 
and  seventy-seven,  all  regular  sessions  shall  be  held  once  in  two 
years,  commencing  on  the  second  Tuesday  of  January  of  each 
alternate  year  thereafter. 

Sec.  26.  The  legislature  shall  provide  for  taking  an  enumera- 
tion of  the  inhabitants  of  the  State  at  least  once  in  ten  years. 
The  first  enumeration  shall  be  taken  in  A.  D.  1865. 

Sec.  27.  The  house  of  representatives  shall  have  the  sole  power 
to  impeach.  All  impeachments  shall  be  tried  by  the  senate;  and 
when  sitting  for  that  purpose,  the  senators  shall  take  an  oath  to 
do  justice  according  to  the  law  and  the  evidence.  No  person 
shall  be  convicted  without  the  concurrence  of  two-thirds  of  the 
senators  elected. 

Sec.  28.  The  Governors  and  all  other  officers  under  this  consti- 
tution shall  be  subject  to  impeachment  for  any  misdemeanor  in 
office;  but  judgment  in  all  such  cases  shall  not  be  extended 
further  than  to  removal  from  office  and  disqualification  to  hold 
any  office  of  profit,  honor  or  trust  under  this  Constitution;  but  the 
party,  whether  acquitted  or  convicted,  shall  be  liable  to  indict- 
ment, trial,  judgment  and  punishment  according  to  law. 

Sec.  29.  At  the  general  election  held  in  eighteen  hundred  and 
seventy-six,  and  thereafter,  members  of  the  house  of  representa- 
tives shall  be  elected  for  two  years,  and  members  of  the  senate 
shall  be  elected  for  four  years. 


ARTICLE  3. 

JUDICIAL. 

Section  1.  The  judicial  power  of  this  State  shall  be  vested  in 
a  supreme  court,  district  courts,  probate  courts,  justices  of  the 
peace,  and  such  other  courts  inferior  to  the  supreme  court  as 
may  be  provided  by  law;  and  all  courts  of  record  shall  have  a 
seal,  to  be  used  in  the  authentication  of  all  process. 

Sec.  2.  The  supreme  court  shall  consist  of  seven  justices,  who 
shall  be  chosen  by  the  electors  of  the  State.  They  may  sit  sepa- 
rately in  two  divisions,  with  full  power  in  each  division  to  deter- 
mine the  cases  assigned  to  be  heard  by  such  division.     Three 


CONSTITUTION.  365 

justices  shall  constitute  a  quorum  in  each  division;  and  the  con- 
currence of  three  shall  be  necessary  to  a  decision.  Such  cases 
only  as  may  be  ordered  to  be  heard  by  the  whole  court  shall  be 
considered  by  all  the  justices,  and  the  concurrence  of  for.r  justices 
shall  be  necessary  to  a  decision  in  cases  so  heard.  The  justice 
who  is  senior  in  continuous  term  of  service  shall  be  chief  justice, 
and  in  case  two  or  more  have  continuously  served  during-  the 
same  period,  the  senior  in  years  of  these  shall  be  chief  justice, 
and  the  presiding  justice  of  each  division  shall  be  selected  from 
the  judge  assigned  to  that  division  in  like  manner.  The  term  of 
office  of  the  justices  shall  be  six  years,  except  as  hereinafter 
provided. 

The  justices  in  office  at  the  time  this  amendment  takes  effect 
shall  hold  their  offices  for  the  terms  for  which  they  were_  severally 
elected,  and  until  their  successors  are  elected  and  qualified.  As 
soon  as  practicable  after  the  second  Monday  in  January,  1901,  the 
Governor  shall  appoint  four  justices  to  hold  their  office  until  the 
second  Monday  in  January,  1903.  At  the  general  election  in  1902 
there  shall  be  elected  five  justices,  one  of  whom  shall  hold  his 
office  for  five  years,  one  of  whom  shall  hold  his  office  for  two 
years,  one  tor  four  years  and  three  for  six  years.  At  the  general 
election  in  1904,  and  every  six  years  thereafter,  two  justices  shall 
be  elected.  At  the  general  election  in  1906,  and  every  six  years 
thereafter,  two  justices  shall  be  elected.  At  the  general  election 
in  1908,  and  every  six  years  thereafter,  three  justices  shall  be 
elected. 

Sec.  3.  The  supreme  court  shall  have  orig-inal  jurisdiction  in 
proceedings  in  quo  warra7ito,  mandamus  and  habeas  corpus;  and 
such  appellate  jurisdiction  as  may  be  provided  by  law.  It  shall 
hold  one  term  each  year  at  the  seat  of  government,  and  such 
other  terms  at  such  places  as  may  be  provided  by  law,  and  its 
jurisdiction  shall  be  co-extensive  with  the  State. 

Sec.  4.  There  shall  be  appointed  by  the  justices  of  the 
supreme  court,  a  reporter  and  clerk  of  said  court,  who  shall  hold 
their  offices  two  years,  and  whose  duties  shall  be  prescribed  by  law. 

Sec.  5.  The  State  shall  be  divided  into  five  judicial  districts,  in 
each  of  which  there  shall  be  elected,  by  the  electors  thereof,  a 
district  judge,  who  shall  hold  his  office  for  the  term  of  four  years. 
District  courts  shall  be  held  at  such  times  and  places  as  may  be 
provided  by  law. 

Sec.  6.  The  district  courts  shall  have  such  jurisdiction  in  their 
respective  districts  as  may  be  provided  by  law. 

Sec.  7.     There  shall  be  elected  in  each  organized  county  a  clerk 
of  the  district  court,  who  shall  hold  his  office    two   years,    and 
•whose  duties  shall  be  prescribed  by  law. 


366  APPENDIX. 

Sec.  8.  There  shall  be  a  probate  court  in  each  county,  which 
shall  be  a  court  of  record,  and  have  such  probate  jurisdiction  and 
care  of  estates  of  deceased  persons,  minors  and  persons  of 
unsound  minds,  as  may  be  prescribed  by  law,  and  shall  have  juris- 
diction in  cases  of  habeas  corpus.  This  court  shall  consist  of  one 
judge,  who  shall  be  elected  by  the  qualified  voters  of  the  county, 
and  hold  his  office  two  years.  He  shall  be  his  own  clerk,  and 
shall  hold  court  at  such  times,  and  receive  for  compensation  such 
fees  as  may  be  prescribed  by  law. 

Sec.  9.  Two  justices  of  the  peace  shall  be  elected  in  each 
township,  whose  term  of  office  shall  be  two  years,  and  whose 
powers  and  duties  shall  be  prescribed^  by  law.  The  number  of 
justices  of  the  peace  may  be  increased  in  any  township  by  law. 

Sec.  10.  All  appeals  from  probate  courts  and  justices  of  the 
peace  shall  be  to  the  district  court. 

Sec.  11.  All  the  judicial  officers  provided  for  by  this  article 
shall  be  elected  at  the  first  election  under  this  Constitution,  and 
shall  reside  in  their  respective  townships,  counties  or  districts 
during  their  respective  terms  of  office.  In  case  of  vacancy  in  any 
judicial  office,  it  shall  be  filled  by  appointment  of  the  Governor 
until  the  next  regular  election  that  shall  occur  more  than  thirty 
days  after  such  vacancy  shall  have  happened. 

Sec.  12.  All  judicial  officers  shall  hold  their  offices  until  their 
successors  shall  have  qualified. 

Sec.  13.  The  justices  of  the  supreme  court  and  judges  of  the 
district  courts  shall,  at  stated  times,  receive  for  their  services  such 
compensation  as  may  be  provided  by  law,  which  shall  not  be 
inci*eased  during  their  respective  terms  of  office;  provided  such 
compensation  shall  not  be  less  than  fifteen  hundred  dollars  to  each 
justice  or  judge  each  year,  and  such  justices  or  judges  shall 
receive  no  fees  or  perquisites,  nor  hold  any  other  office  of  profit 
or  trust  under  the  authority  of  the  State  or  the  United  States  dur- 
ing the  term  of  offi.ce  for  which  said  justices  and  judges  shall  be 
elected,  nor  practice  law  in  any  of  the  courts  in  the  State  during 
their  continuance  in  office. 

Sec.  14.  Provision  may  be  made  by  law  for  the  increase  of  the 
number  of  judicial  districts  whenever  two-thirds  of  the  members 
of  each  house  shall  concur.  Such  districts  shall  be  formed  of 
compact  Territory,  and  bounded  by  county  lines,  and  such 
increase  shall  not  vacate  the  office  of  any  judge. 

Sec.  15.  Justices  of  the  supreme  court  and  judges  of  the  dis- 
trict courts  may  be  removed  from  office  by  resolution  of  both 
houses,  if  two-thirds  of  the  members  of  each  house  concur;  but 
no  such  removal  shall  be  made  except  upon  complaint,  the  sub- 


CONSTITUTION.  367 

stance  of  which  shall  be  entered  upon  the  journal,  nor  until  the 
party  charged  shall  have  had  notice  and  opportunity  to  be  heard. 

Sec.  16.  The  several  justices  and_  judges_  of  the  courts  of 
record  in  this  State,  shall  have  such  jurisdiction  at  chambers  as 
may  be  provided  by  law. 

Sec.  17.  The  style  of  all  process  shall  be  "The  State  of  Kansas," 
and  all  prosecutions  shall  be  carried  on  in  the  name  of  the  State. 

Sec.  18.  Until  otherwise  provided  by  law,  the  first  district 
shall  consist  of  the  counties  of  Wyandotte,  Leavenworth,  Jeffer- 
son and  Jackson.  The  second  district  shall  consist  of  the  counties 
of  Atchison,  Doniphan,  Brown,  Nemaha,  Marshall  and  Washing- 
ton. The  third  district  shall  consist  of  the  counties  of  Pottawa- 
tomie, Riley,  Clay,  Dickinson,  Davis,  Wabaunsee  and  Shawnee. 
The  fourth  district  shall  consist  of  the  counties  of  Douglas,  John- 
son, Lykins,  Franklin,  Anderson,  Linn,  Bourbon  and  Allen.  The 
fifth  district  shall  consist  of  the  counties  of  Osage,  Coffey,  Wood- 
son, Greenwood,  Madison,  Breckinridge,  Morris,  Chase,  Butler 
and  Hunter. 

Sec.  19.  New  or  unorganized  counties  shall  by  law  be  attached 
for  judicial  purposes  to  the  most  convenient  judicial  districts. 

Sec.  20.  Provision  shall  be  made  by  law  for  the  selection,  by 
the  bar,  of  ajjro  tem.  judge  of  the  district  court,  when  the  judge 
is  absent  or  otherwise  unable  or  disqualified  to  sit  in  any  case. 


ARTICLE  4. 

ELECTIONS. 

Section  1.  All  elections  by  the  people  shall  be  by  ballot,  and 
all  elections  by  the  legislature  shall  be  viva  voce. 

Sec.  2.  General  elections  and  township  elections  shall  be  held 
biennally,  on  the  Tuesday  succeeding  the  first  Monday  in  Novem- 
ber in  the  years  bearing  even  numbers.  All  county  and  township 
officers  shall  hold  their  offices  for  a  term  of  two  years  and  until 
tlieir  successors  are  qualified  ;  provided,  one  county  commissioner 
shall  be  elected  from  each  of  three  districts,  numbered  1,  2  and  3, 
by  the  voters  of  the  district,  and  the  legislature  shall  fix  the  time 
or  election  and  the  term  of  office  of  such  commissioners  ;  such 
election  to  be  at  a  general  election,  and  no  term  of  office  to  exceed 
six  j^ears.  All  officers  whose  successors  would,  under  the  law  as 
it  existed  at  the  time  of  their  election,  be  elected  in  an  odd  num- 
bered year,  shall  hold  office  for  an  additional  year  and  until  their 
successors  are  qualified.  No  person  shall  hold  the  office  of  sheriff 
or  county  treasurer  for  more  than  two  consecutive  terms. 


368  CONSTITUTION. 

ARTICLE  5. 

SUFFRAGE, 

Section  1.  Every  [white]  male  person  of  twenty-one  years 
and  upwards,  belonging-  to  either  of  the  following  classes — who 
shall  have  resided  in  Kansas  six  months  next  preceding  any  elec- 
tion, and  in  the  township  or  ward  in  which  he  offers  to  vote  at 
least  thirty  days  next  preceding  such  election — shall  be  deemed  a 
qualified  elector: 

1st.     Citizens  of  the  United  States. 

2d.  Persons  of  foreign  birth  who  shall  have  declared  their 
intention  to  become  citizens  conformably  to  the  laws  of  the  United 
States  on  the  subject  of  naturalization. 

Sec.  2.  No  person  under  guardianship,  non  compos  mentis,  or 
insane;  no  person  convicted  of  felony,  unless  restored  to  civil 
rights ;  no  person  who  has  been  dishonorably  discharged  from  the 
service  of  the  United  States,  unless  reinstated;  no  person  guilty 
of  defrauding  the  Government  of  the  United  States,  or  any  of  the 
States  thereof;  no  person  guilty  of  giving  or  receiving  a  bribe,  or 
offering  to  give  or  receive  a  bribe ;  and  no  person  w^ho  has  ever 
voluntarily  borne  arms  against  the  Government  of  the  United 
States,  or  in  any  manner  voluntarily  aided  or  abetted  in  the 
attempted  overthrow  of  said  Government,  except  all  persons  who 
have  been  honorably  discharged  from  the  military  service  of  the 
United  States  since  the  first  day  of  April  a.  d.,  1861,  provided 
that  they  have  served  one  year  or  more  therein,  shall  be  qualified 
to  vote  or  hold  ofiice  in  this  State,  until  such  disability  shall  be 
removed  by  a  law  passed  by  a  vote  of  two-thirds  of  all  the  mem- 
bers of  both  branches  of  the  legislature. 

Sec.  3.  For  the  purpose  of  voting,  no  person  shall  be  deemed 
to  have  gained  or  lost  a  residence'  by  reason  of  his  presence  or 
absence  while  employed  in  the  service  of  the  United  States,  nor 
while  engaged  in  the  navigation  of  the  waters  of  this  State,  or  of 
the  United  States,  or  oi  the  high  seas,  nor  while  a  student  of  any 
seminary  of  learning,  nor  while  kept  at  any  almshouse  or  other 
asylum  at  public  expense,  nor  while  confined  in  any  public  prison; 
and  the  legislature  may  make  provision  for  ^  taking  the  votes  of 
electors  who  may  be  absent  from  their  townships  or  wards,  in  the 
volunteer  military  service  of  the  _  United  States,  or  the  militia 
service  of  this  State;  but  nothing  herein  contained  shall  be 
deemed  to  allow  any  soldier,  seaman  or  marine  in  the  regular 
army  or  navy  of  the  United  States  the  right  to  vote. 

Sec.  4.  The  legislature  shall  pass  such  la\ys  as  may  be  neces- 
sary for  ascertaining,  by  proper  proofs,  the  citizens  who  shall  be 
entitled  to  the  right  of  suffrage  hereby  established. 


APPENDIX.  ^  369 

Sec.  5.  Every  person  who  shall  give  or  accept  a  challeng-e  to 
fight  a  duel,  or  who  shall  knowingly  carry  to  another  person  such 
challenge,  or  who  shall  go  out  of  the  State  to  fight  a  duel,  shall 
be  ineligible  to  any  office  of  trust  or  profit. 

Sec.  6.  Eyery  person  who  shall  have_  given  or  offered  a  bribe 
to  ptrocure  his  election,  shall  be  disqualified  from  holding  office 
during  the  term  for  which  he  may  have  been  elected. 

Sec.  7.  Electors,  during  their  attendance  at  elections,  and  in 
going  to  and  returning  therefrom,  shall  be  privileged  from  arrest 
in  all  cases  except  treason,  felony  or  breach  of  the  peace. 


ARTICLE  6. 

EDUCATION. 

Section  1.  The  State  Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction 
shall  have  the  general  supervision  of  the  common  school  funds  and 
educational  interests  of  the  State,  and  perform  such  other  duties 
as  may  be  prescribed  by  law.  A  superintendent  of  public  instruc- 
tion shall  be  elected  in  each  county,  whose  term  of  office  shall  be 
two  years,  and  whose  duties  and  compensation  shall  be  prescribed 
by  law. 

Sec.  2.  The  legislature  shall  encourage  the  promotion  of  intel- 
lectual, moral,  scientific  and  agricultural  improvement,  by  estab- 
lishing a  uniform  system  of  common  schools,  and  schools  of  a 
higher  grade,  embracing  normal,  preparatory,  collegiate  and  uni- 
versity departments. 

Sec.  3.  The  proceeds  of  all  lands  that  have  been  or  may  be 
granted  by  the  United  States  to  the  State  for  the  support  of 
schools,  and  the  five  hundred  thousand  acres  of  land  granted  to 
the  new  States  under  an  act  of  congress  distributing  the  proceeds 
of  public  lands  among  the  several  States  of  the  Union,  approved 
September  _  4th,  A.  D.,  1841,  and  all  estates  of  persons  dying 
without  heir  or  will,  and  such  per  cent  as  may  be  granted  by 
congress  on  the  sale  of  lands  in  this  State,  shall  be  the  common 
property  of  the  State,  and  shall  be  a  perpetual  school  fund,  which 
shall  not  be  diminished,  but  the  interest  of  which,  together  with 
all  the  rents  of  the  lands,  and  such  other  means  as  the  legislature 
may  provide,  by  tax  or  otherwise,  shall  be  inviolably  appropriated 
to  the  support  of  common  schools. 

Sec.  4.  The  income  of  the  State  school  funds  shall  be  disbursed 
annually,  by  order  of  the  State  Superintendent,  to  the  several 
county  treasurers,  and  thence  to  the  treasurers  of   the  several 


370  CONSTITUTION. 

school  districts,  in  equitable  proportion  to  the  number  of  children 
and  youth  resident  therein,  between  the  ages^of  five  and  twenty- 
one  years;  provided,  that  no  school  district,  in  which  a  common 
school  has  not  been  maintained  at  least  three  months  in  each  year, 
shall  be  entitled  to  receive  any  portion  of  such  funds. 

Sec.  5.  The  school  lands  shall  not  be  sold,  unless  such  sale 
shall  be  authorized  by  a  vote  of  the  people  at  a. general  election; 
but,  subject  to  re-valuation  every  five  years,  they  may  be  leased 
for  any  number  of  years,  not  exceeding"  twenty-five,  at  a  rate 
established  by  law. 

Sec.  6.  All  money  which  shall  be  paid  by  persons  as  an  equiv- 
alent for  exemption  from  military  duty;  the  clear  proceeds  of 
estrays,  ownership  of  which  shall  vest  in  the  taker-up;  and  the 
proceeds  of  fines  for  any  breach  of  the  penal  laws,  shall  be  exclu- 
sively applied  in  the  several  counties  in  which  the  money  is  paid 
or  fines  collected,  to  the  support  of  common  schools. 

Sec.  7.  Provision  shall  be  made  by  law  for  the  establishment, 
at  some  eligible  and  central  point,  of  a  State  university  for  the 
promotion  of  literature,  and  the  arts  and  sciences,  including  a 
normal  and  an  agricultural  department.  All  funds  arising  from 
the  sale  or  rents  of  lands  granted  by  the  United  States  to  the  State 
for  the  support  of  a  State  university,  and  all  other  grants,  dona- 
tions or  bequests,  either  by  the  State  or  by  individuals,  for  such 
purpose,  shall  remain  a  perpetual  fund,  to  be  called  the  "univer- 
sity fund,"  the  interest  of  which  shall  be  appropriated  to  the  sup- 
port of  the  State  university. 

Sec.  8.  No  religious  sect  or  sects  shall  ever  control  any  part  of 
the  common  school  or  university  funds  of  the  State. 

Sec.  9.  The  State  Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction,  Sec- 
retary of  State  and  Attorney-General,  shall  constitute  a  board  of 
commissioners,  for  the  management  and  investment  of  the  school 
funds.     Any  two  of  said  commissioners  shall  be  a  quorum. 


ARTICLE  7. 

PUBLIC  INSTITUTIONS.  ' 

Section  1.  Institutions  for  the  benefit  of  the  insane,  blind,  and 
deaf  and  dumb,  and  such  other  benevolent  institutions  as  the 
pubUc  good  may  require,  shall  be  fostered  and  supported  by  the 
State,  subject  to  such  regulations  as  may  be  prescribed  by  law. 
Trustees  of  such  benevolent  institutions  as  may  be  hereafter 
created,  shall  be  appointed  by  the  Governor,  by  and  with  the  advice 


APPENDIX.  371 

and  consent  of  the  senate :  and  upon  all  nominations  made  by  the 
Governor  the  question  shall  be  taken  in  yeas  and  nays,  and  entered 
upon  the  journal. 

Sec.  2.  A  penitentiary  shall.be  established,  the  directors  of 
which  shall  be  appointed  or  elected,  as  prescribed  by  law. 

Sec.  3.  The  Governor  shall  fill  any  vacancy  that  m'ay  occur  in 
the  offices  aforesaid  until  the  next  session  of  the  legislature,  and 
until  a  successor  to  his  appointee  shall  be  confirmed  and  qualified. 

Sec.  4.  The  respective  counties  of  the  State  shall  provide,  as 
may  be  prescribed  by  law,  for  those  inhabitants  who^  by  reason  of 
age,  infirmity,  or  other ^  misfortune,  may  have  claims  upon  the 
sympathy  and  aid  of  society. 


ARTICLE  8. 

MILITIA. 

Section  1.  The  militia  shall  be  composed  of  all  able-bodied 
male  citizens  between  the  ages  of  twenty-one  and  forty-five  years, 
except  such  as  are  exempted  by  the  laws  of  the  United  States  or  of 
this  State;  but  all  citizens  of  any  religious  denomination  whatever 
who.  from  scruples  of  conscience  may  be  averse  to  bearing  arms, 
shall  be  exempted  therefrom  upon  such  conditions  as  may  be  pre- 
scribed by  law. 

Sec.  2.  The  legislature  shall  provide  for  organizing,  equipping 
and  disciplining  the  militia  in  such  manner  as  it  shall  deem  expe- 
dient not  incompatible  with  the  laws  of  the  United  States. 

Sec.  3.  Officers  of  the  militia  shall  be  elected  or  appointed,  and 
commissioned  in  such  manner  as  may  be  provided  by  law. 

Sec.  4.  The  Governor  shall  be  commander-in-chief,  and  shall 
have  power  to  call  out  the  militia  to  execute  the  laws,  to  suppress 
insurrection,  and  to  repel  invasion. 


ARTICLE  9. 

COUNTY  AND  TOWNSHIP  ORGANIZATION. 

Section  1.  The  legislature  shall  provide  for  organizing  new 
counties,  locating  county  seats,  and  changing  county  lines;  but 
no  county  seat  shall  be  changed  without  the  consent  of  a  majority 
of  the  electors  of  the  county;  nor  any  county  organized,  nor  the 
lines  of  any  county  changed  so  as  to  include  an  area  of  less  than 
four  hundred  and  thirty-two  square  miles. 


372  CONSTITUTION. 

Sec.  2.  The  legislature  shall  provide  for  such  county  and  town- 
ship of&cers  as  may  be  necessary. 

Sec.  3.  All  county  officers  shall  hoid  tieir  offices  for  the  term 
of  two  years,  and  until  their  successors  shall  be  qualified,  except 
county  commissioners,  who  shall  hold  their  offices  for  the  term  of 
three  years;  provided,  that  at  the  general  election  in  the  year 
eighteen  hundred  and  seventy-seven,  the  commissioner  elected 
from  district  number  one  in  each  county  shall  hold  his  office  for 
the  term  of  one  year;  the  commissioner  elected  from  district  num- 
ber two  in  each  county  shall  hold  his  office  for  the  term  of  two 
years,  and  the  commissioner  elected  from  district  number  three  in 
each  county  shall  hold  his  office  for  the  term  of  three  years;  bivfc 
no  person  shall  hold  the  office  of  sheriff  or  county  treasurer  for 
more  than  two  consecutive  terms. 

Sec.  4.  Township  officers,  except  justices  of  the  peace,  shall 
hold  their  offices  one  year  from  the  Monday  next  succeeding  their 
election,  and  until  their  successors  are  qualified. 

Sec.  5.  All  county  and  township  officers  maybe  removed  from 
office,  in. such  manner  and  for  such  cause  as  shall  be  prescribed 
by  law. 

ARTICLE  10. 

apportionment. 

Section  1.  In  the  future  apportionments  of  the  State,  each 
organized  county  shall  have  at  least  one  representative;  and  each 
county  shall  be  divided  into  as  many  districts  as  it  has  representa- 
tives. 

Sec.  2.  It  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  first  legislature  to  make  an 
apportionment,  based  upon  the  census  ordered  by  the  last  legis- 
lative assembly  of  the  Territory;  and  a  new  apportionment  shall 
be  made  in  the  year  1866,  and  every  five  years  thereafter,  based 
upon  the  census  of  the  preceding  year. 

Sec.  3.  Until  there  shall  be  a  new  apportionment,  the  State 
shall  be  divided  into  election  districts;  and  the  representatives  and 
senators  shall  be  apportioned  among  the  several  districts  as  fol- 
lows, viz: 

1st  district,  Doniphan,  4  representatives,  2  senators; 

2d  district,  Atchison  and  Brown,  6  representatives,  2  senators; 

3d  district,  Nemaha,  Marshall  and  Washington,  2  representa- 
tives, 1  senator; 

4th  district,  Clay,  Riley  and  Pottawatomie,  4  represeutativ^s,  1 
serxatorj 


APPENDIX.  373 

5th  district,  Dickinson,  Davis  and  Wabaunsee,  3  representa- 
tives, 1  senator; 

6th  district,  Shawnee,  Jackson  and  Jefferson,  8  representatives. 
2  senators; 

7th  district,  Leavenworth,  9  representatives,  3  senators; 

8th  district,  Douglas,  Johnson  and  Wyandotte,  13  representa- 
tives, 4  senators; 

9th  district,  Lykins,  Linn  and  Bourbon,  9  representatives,  3 
senators; 

10th  district,  Allen,  Anderson  and  Franklin,  6  representatives, 
2  senators; 

11th  district,  Woodson  and  Madison,  2  representatives,  1  senator; 

12th  district,  Coffey,  Osage  and  Breckinridge,  6  representa- 
tives, 2  senators; 

13th  district,  Morris,  Chase  and  Butler,  2  representatives,  1 
senator; 

14th  district,  Arapahoe,  Godfrey,  Greenwood,  Hunter,  Wilson, 
Dorn  and  McGee,  1  representative. 

[Names  of  counties  have  been  changed  as  follows:  Davis  to  Geary; 
Lykins  to  Miajmi;  Madisonwas  abolished  in  1861;  Breckinridge  changed 
to  Lyon;  Arapahoe  was  cut  off  and  extinguished  as  a  Kansas  county  on 
the  admission  of  the  State;  Godfrey  changed  to  Seward,  then  to  Howard, 
and  Howard  was  abolished  and  its  territory  erected  into  Chautauqua  and 
Elk;  Hunter  was  changed  to  Cowley;  Dorn  to  Neosho,  and  McGee  to  Cher- 
okee.] 


ARTICLE  11. 

FINANCE  AND   TAXATION. 

Section  1.  The  legislature  shall  provide  for  a  uniform  and 
eciual  rate  of  assessment  and  taxation ;  but  all  property  used  exclu- 
sively for  State,  county,  municipal,  literary,  educational,  scientific, 
religious,  benevolent  and  charitable  purposes,  and  personal  prop- 
erty to  the  amount  of  at  least  two  hundred  dollars  for  each  family, 
shall  be  exempted  from  taxation. 

Sec.  2.  The  legislature  shall  provide  for  taxing  the  notes  and 
bills  discounted  or  purchased,  moneys  loaned,  and  other  property, 
effects,  or  dues  of  every  description  (without  deduction),  of  all 
banks  now  existing,  or  hereafter  to  be  created,  and  of  all  bankers; 
so  that  all  property  employed  in  banking  shall  always  bear  a  bur- 
den of  taxation  equal  to  that  imposed  upon  the  property  of  indi- 
viduals. 


374  CONSTITUTION. 

Sec.  3.  The  legislature  shall  provide,  at  each  regular  session, 
for  raising  sufficient  revenue  to  defray  the  current  expenses  of  the 
State  for  two  years. 

Sec.  4.  No  tax  shall  be  levied  except  in  pursuance  of  a  law 
which  shall  distinctly  state  the  object  of  the  same,  to  which  object 
only  such  tax  shall  be  applied. 

Sec.  5.  For  the  purpose  of  defraying  extraordinary  expenses 
and  making  public  improvements,  the  State  may  contract  public 
debts;  but  such  debts  shall  never,  in  the  aggregate,  exceed  one 
million  dollars,  except  as  hereinafter  provided.  Every  such  debt 
shall  be  authorized  by  law  for  some  purpose  specified  therein,  and 
the  vote  of  a  majority  of  all  the  members  elected  to  each  house, 
to  be  taken  by  the  yeas  and  nays,  shall  be  necessary  to  the  passage 
of  such  law;  and  every  such  law  shall  provide  for  levying  an 
annual  tax  sufficient  to  pay  the  annual  interest  of  such  debt,  and 
the  principal  thereof,  when  it  shall  become  due;  and  shall  spe- 
cifically appropriate  the  proceeds  of  such  taxes  to  the  payment  of 
such  principal  and  interest;  and  such  appropriation  shall  not  be 
repealed  nor  the  taxes  postponed  or  diminished,  until  the  interest 
and  principal  of  such  debt  shall  have  been  wholly  paid. 

Sec.  6.  No  debt  shall  be  contracted  by  the  State  except  as 
herein  provided,  unless  the  proposed  law  for  creating  such  debt 
shall  first  be  submitted. to  a  direct  vote  of  the  electors  of  the  State 
at  some  general  election ;  and  if  such  proposed  law  shall  be  ratified 
by  a  majority  of  all  the  votes  cast  at  such  general  election,  then  it 
shall  be  the  duty  of  the  legislature,  next  after  such  electi9n,  to 
enact  such  law  and  create  such  debt,  subject  to  all  the  provisions 
and  restrictions  provided  in  the  preceding  sections  of  this  article. 

Sec.  7.  The  State  may  borrow  money  to  repel  invasion,  sup- 
press insurrection,  or  defend  the  State  in  time  of  war;  but  the 
money  thus  raised  shall  be  applied  exclusively  to  the  object  for 
which  the  loan  was  authorized,  or  to  the  repayment  of  the  debt 
thereby  created. 

Sec.  8.  The  State  shall  never  be  a  party  in  carrying  on  any 
works  of  internal  improvement. 


ARTICLE  12. 

CORPORATIONS. 

Section  1.  The  legislature  shall  pass  no  special  act  conferring 
corporate  powers.  Corporations  may  be  created  under  general 
laws;  but  all  such  laws  may  be  amended  or  repealed. 


APPENDIX.  375 

Sec.  2.  Dues  from  corporations  shall  be  secured  by  individual 
liability  of  the  stockholders  to  an  additional  amount  equal  to  the 
stock  owned  by  each  stockholder,  and  such  other  means  as  shall 
be  provided  by  law;  but  such  individual  liabilities  shall  not  apply 
to  railroad  corporations,  nor  corporations  for  religious  or  chari- 
table purposes. 

Sec.  3.  The  title  to  all  property  of  religious  corporations  shall 
vest  in  trustees,  whose  election  shall  be  by  the  members  of  such 
corporations. 

Sec.  4.  No  right-of-way  shall  be  appropriated  to  the  use  of  any 
corporation,  until  full  compensation  therefor  be  first  made  in 
money,  or  secured  by  a  deposit  in  money,  to  the  owner,  irrespec- 
tive of  any  benefit  from  any  improvement  proposed  by  such 
corporation. 

Sec.  5.  Provision  shall  be  made  by  general  law  for  the  organ- 
ization of  cities,  towns,  and  villages;  and  their  power  of  taxation, 
assessment,  borrowing  money,  contracting  debts  and  loaning 
their  credit,  shall  be  so  restricted  as  to  prevent  the  abuse  of  such 
power. 

^  Sec.  6.  The  term  corporations,  as  used  in  this  article,  shall 
include  all  the  associations  and  joint  stock  companies  having 
powers  and  privileges  not  possessed  by  individuals  or  partner- 
ships ;  and  all  corporations  may  sue  and  be  sued  in  their  corporate 
name. 


ARTICLE  13. 

BANKS  AND   CURRENCY. 

Section  1.  No  bank  shall  be  established  otherwise  than  under 
a  general  banking  law. 

Sec.  2.  All  banking  laws  shall  require  as  collateral  sercurity  for 
the  redemption  of  the  circulating  notes  of  any  bank  organized 
under  their  provision,  a  deposit  with  the  Auditor  of  State  of  the 
interest-paying  bonds  of  the  several  States,  or  of  the  United 
States,  at  the  cash  rates  of  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange,  to  an 
amount  equal  to  the  amount  of  circulating  notes  which  such  bank 
shall  be  authorized  to  issue,  and  a  cash  deposit  in  its  vaults  of  ten 
per  cent  of  such  amount  of  circulating  notes;  and  the  Auditor 
shall  register  and  countersign  no  more  circulating  bills  of  any  bank 
than  the  cash  value  of  such  bonds  when  deposited. 

Sec.  3.  Whenever  the  bonds  pledged  as  collateral  security  for 
the  circulation  of  any  bank  shall  depreciate  in  value,  the  Auditor 
of  State  shall  require  additional  security,  or  curtail  the  circulation 


376  CONSTITUTION. 

of  such  bank,  to  such  extent  as  will  continue  the  security  unim- 
paired. 

Sec.  4.  All  circulating  notes  shall  be  redeemable  in  the  money 
of  the  United  States.  Holders  of  such  notes  shall  be  entitled,  in 
case  of  the  insolvency  of  such  banks,  to  preference  of  payment 
over  all  other  creditors. 

Sec.  5.  The  State  shall  not  be  a  stockholder  in  any  banking 
institution. 

Sec.  6.  All  banks  shall  be  required  to  keep  offices  and  officers 
for  the  issue  and  redemption  of  their  circulation,  at  a  convenient 
place  within  the  State,  to  be  named  on  the  circulating  notes  issued 
by  such  bank. 

Sec.  7.  No  banking  institution  shall  issue  circulating  notes  of 
a  less  denomination  than  one  dollar. 

Sec.  8.  No  banking  law  shall  be  in  force  until  the  same  shall 
have  been  submitted  to  a  vote  of  the  electors  of  the  State  at  some 
general  election,  and  approved  by  a  majority  of  all  the  votes  cast 
at  such  election. 

Sec.  9.     Any  banking  law  may  be  amended  or  repealed. 


ARTICLE  14. 

AMENDMENTS. 

_  Section  1.  Propositions  for  the  amendment  of  this  Constitu- 
tion may  be  made  by  either  branch  of  the  legislature;  and  if 
two-thirds  of  all  the  members  elected  to  each  house  shall  concur 
therein,  such  proposed  amendments,  together  with  the  yeas  and 
nays,  shall  be  entered  on  the  journal;  and  the  Secretary  of  State 
shall  cause  the  same  to  be  published  in  at  least  one  newspaper  in 
each  county  of  the  State  where  a  newspaper  is  published,  for 
three  months  preceding  the  next  election  for  representatives,  at 
which  time  the  same  shall  be  submitted  to  the  electors  for  their 
approval  or  rejection;  and  if  a  majority  of  the  electors  voting  on 
said  amendments,  at  said  election,  shall  adopt  the  amendments, 
the  same  shall  become  a  part  of  the  Constitution.  When  more 
than  one  amendment  shall  be  submitted  at  the  same  time,  they 
shall  be  so  submitted  as  to  enable  the  electors  to  vote  on  each 
amendment  separately;  and  not  more  than  three  propositions  to 
amend  shall  be  submitted  at  the  same  election. 

Sec.  2.     Whenever  two-thirds  of  the  members  elected  to  each 
branch  of  the  legislature  shall  think  it  necessary  to  call  a  conven- 


APPENDIX.  377 

tion  to  revise,  amend  or  change  this  Constitution,  they  shall 
recommend  to  the  electors  to  vote  at  the  next  election  of  members 
to  the  legislature,  for  or  against  a  convention;  and  if  a  majority 
of  all  the  electors  voting  at  such  election  shall  have  voted  for  a 
convention,  the  legislature  shall,  at  the  next  session,  provide  for 
calling  the  same. 


ARTICLE  15. 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

Section  1.  All  officers  whose  election  or  appointment  is  not 
otherwise  provided  for,  shall  be  chosen  or  appointed  as  may  be 
prescribed  by  law. 

Sec.  2.  The  tenure  of  any  office  not  herein  provided  for  may 
be  declared  by  law;  when  not  so  declared  such  office  shall  be  held 
during  the  pleasure  of  the  authority  making  the  appointment,  but 
the  legislature  shaJl  not  create  any  office  the  tenure  of  which  shall 
be  longer  than  four  years. 

Sec.  3.  Lotteries  and  the  sale  of  lottery  tickets  are  forever 
prohibited. 

Sec.  4.  All  public  printing  shall  be  done  by  the  State  Printer, 
who  shall  be  elected  by  the  people  at  the  election  held  for  State 
officers  in  November,  190C,  and  every  two  years  thereafter,  at  the 
election  held  for  state  qfficers,  and  shall  hold  his  office  for  two 
years  and  until  his  successor  shall  be  elected  and  qualified. 

Sec.  5.  An  accurate  and  detailed  statement  of  the  receipts  and 
expenditures  of  the  public  moneys,  and  the  several  amounts  paid, 
to  whom,  and  on  what  account,  shall  be  published,  as  prescribed 
by  law. 

Sec.  6.  The  legislature  shall  provide  for  the  protection  of  the 
rights  of  women  in  acquiring  and  possessing  property,  real,  per- 
sonal and  mixed,  separate  and  apart  from  the  husband;  and  shall 
also  provide  for  their  equal  rights  in  the  possession  of  their 
children. 

Sec.  7.  The  legislature  may  reduce  the  salaries  of  officers  who 
shall  neglect  the  performance  of  any  legal  duty. 

Sec.  8.  The  temporary  seat  of  Government  is  hereby  located 
at  the  city  of  Topeka,  county  of  Shawnee.  The  first  legislature 
under  this  Constitution  shall  provide  by  law  for  submitting  the 
question  of  the  permanent  location  of  the  capital  to  a  popular 


378  CONSTITUTION. 

vote,  and  a  majority  of  all  the  votes  cast  at  some  general  election 
shall  be  necessary  for  such  location. 

Sec.  9.  A  homestead,  to  the  extent  of  one  hundred  and  sixty 
acres  of  farming  land,  or  of  one  acre  within  the  limits  of  an  incor- 
porated town  or  city,  occupied  as  a  residence  by  the  family  of  the 
owner,  together  with  all  improvements  on  the  same,  shall  be 
exempted  from  forced  sale  under  any  process  of  law,  and  shall 
not  be  alienated  without  the  joint  consent  of  husband  and  wife, 
when  that  relation  exists;  but  no  propertj^  shall  be  exempt  from 
sale  for  taxes,  or  for  the  payment  of  obligations  contracted  for  the 
purchase  of  said  premises,  or  for  the  erection  of  improvements 
th6reon;  provided,  the  provisions  of  this  section  shall  not  apply 
to  any  process  of  law  obtained  by  virtue  of  a  lien  given  by  the 
consent  of  both  husband  and  wife. 

Sec.  10.  The  manufacture  and  sale  of  intoxicating  liquors  shall 
be  forever  prohibited  in  this  State,  exciept  for  medical,  scientific 
and  mechanical  purposes. 


SCHEDULE. 

Section  1.  That  no  inconvenience  may  arise  from  the  change 
from  a  Territorial  Government  to  a  permanent  State  Government, 
it  is  declared  by  this  Constitution,  that  all  suits,  rights,  actions, 
prosecutions,  recognizances,  contracts,  judgments  and  claims, 
both  as  respects,  individuals  and  bodies  corporate,  shall  continue 
as  if  no  change  had  taken  place. 

Sec.  2.  All  fines,  penalties  and  forfeitures,  owing  to  the  Terri- 
tory of  Kansas,  or  any  county,  shall  inure  to  the  use  of  the  State 
or  county.  All  bonds  executed  to  the  Territory,  or  any  officer 
thereof  in  his  official  capacity,  shall  pass  over  to  the  Governor,  or 
other  officers  of  the  State  or  county,  and  their  successors  in  office, 
for  the  use  of  the  State  or  county,  or  by  him  or  them  to  be 
respectively  assigned  over  to  the  use  of  those  concerned,  as  the 
ease  may  be. 

Sec.  3.  The  Governor,  Secretary  and  judges,  and  all  other 
officers,  both  civil  and  military,  under  the  Territorial  Government, 
shall  continue  in  the  exercise  of  the  duties  of  their  respective 
departments  until  the  said  officers  are  superseded  under  the 
authority  of  this  Constitution. 

Sec.  4.  All  laws  and  parts  of  laws  in  force  in  the  Territory  at 
the  tinie  of  the  acceptance  of  this  Constitution  by  Congress,  not 
inconsistent  with  this  Constitution,  shall  continue  and  remain  in 
full  force  until  they  expire,  or  shall  be  repealed. 


APPENDIX.  379 

Sec.  5.  The  Governor  shall  use  his  private  seal  until  a  State 
seal  is  provided. 

Sec.  6.  The  Governor,  Secretary  of  State,  Auditor  of  State, 
Treasurer  of  State,  Attorney-General  and  Superintendent  of 
Public  Instruction  shall  keep  their  respective  offices  at  the  seat  of 
Government. 

Sec.  7.  All  records,  documents,  books,  papers,  moneys  and 
vouchers  belonging-  and  pertaining  to  the  several  Territorial  courts 
and  offices,  and  to  the  several  district  and  county  offices,  at  the 
date  of  the  admission  of  this  State  into  the  Union,  shall  be  dis- 
posed of  in  such  manner  as  may  be  prescribed  by  law.  ** 

Sec.  8.  All  suits,  pleas,  plaints  and  other  proceedings  pending 
in  any  court  of  record,  or  justices'  court,  may  be  prosecuted  to 
final  judgment  and  execution;  and  all  appeals,  writ  of  error, 
certiorari  injunctions,  or  other  proceedings  whatever,  may  progress 
and  be  carried  on  as  if  this  Constitution  had  not  been  adopted, 
and  the  legislature  shall  direct  the  mode  in  which  such  suits, 
pleas,  plaints,  prosecutions  and  other  proceedings,  and  all  papers, 
records,  books  and  documents  connected  therewith,  may  be 
removed  to  the  courts  established  by  this  Constitution.   ^ 

Sec.  9.  For  the  purpose  of  taking  the  vote  of  the  electors  of 
this  Territory  for  the  ratification  or  rejection  of  this  Constitution, 
an  election  shall  be  held  in  the  several  voting  precincts  in  this 
Territory,  on  the  first  Tuesday  in  October,  A.  D.,  1859. 

Sec.  10.  Each  elector  shall  express  his  assent  or  dissent  by 
voting  a  written  or  printed  ballot  labeled  "For  the  Constitution," 
or  "Against  the  Constitution." 

Sec.  11.  If  a  majority  of  all  the  votes  cast  at  such  election 
shall  be  in  favor  of  the  Constitution,  then  there  shall  be  an  elec- 
tion held  in  the  several  voting  precincts  on  the  first  Tuesday  in 
December,  A.  D.,  1859,  for  the  election  of  members  of  the  first 
legislature,  of  all  State,  district  and  county  officers  provided  for  in 
this  Constitution,  and  for  a  representative  in  congress. 

Sec.  12.  All  persons  having  the  qualification  of  electors,  accord- 
ing to  the  provisions  of  this  Constitution,  at  the  date  of  each  of  said 
elections,  and  who  shall  have  been  duly  registered  according  to 
the  provisions  of  the  registry  law  of  this  Territory,  and  none 
others,  shall  be  entitled  to  vote  at  each  of  said  elections. 

Sec.  13.  The  persons  who  may  be  judges  of  the  several  voting 
precincts  of  this  Territory  at  the  date  of  the  respective  elections 
m  this  schedule  provided  for,  shall  be  the  judges  of  the  respective 
elections  herein  provided  for. 

Sec.  14.  The  said  judges  of  election,  before  entering  upon  the 
duties  of  their  office,  shall  take  and  subscribe  an  oath  faithfully  to 


380  CONSTITUTION. 

discharge  their  duties  as  such.  They  shall  appoint  two  clerks  of 
election,  who  shall  be  sworn  by  one  of  said  judges  faithfully  to 
discharge  their  duties  as  such.  In  the  event  of  a  vacancy  in  the 
board  of  judges  the  same  shall  be  filled  by  the  electors  present. 

Sec.  15.  At  each  of  the  elections  provided  for  in  this  schedule 
the  polls  shall  be  open  between  the  hours  of  nine  and  ten  o'clock, 
A.  M.,  and  close  at  sunset. 

Sec.  16.  The  tribunals  transacting  county  business  of  the  sev- 
eral counties,  shall  cause  to  be  furnished  to  the  boards  of  judges 
in  their  respective  counties  two  poll  books  for  each  election  here- 
inbefore provided  for,  upon  which  the  clerks  shall  inscribe  the 
name  of  every  person  who  may  vote  at  the  said  elections. 

Sec.  17.  After  closing  the  polls  at  each  of  the  elections  provided 
for  in  this  schedule,  the  judges  shall  proceed  to  count  the  votes 
cast,  and  designate  the  persons  or  objects  for  which  they  were 
cast,  and  shall  make  two  correct  tally  lists  of  the  same. 

Sec.  18.  Each  of  the  boards  of  judges  shall  safely  keep  one 
poll  book  and  tally  list,  and  the  ballots  cast  at  each  election;  and 
shall,  within  ten  days  after  such  election,  cause  the  other  poll  book 
and  tally  list  to  be  transmitted,  by  the  hands  of  a  sworn  officer,  to 
the  clerk  of  the  board  transacting  county  business  in  their  respect- 
ive counties,  or  to  which  the  county  may  be  attached  for  municipal 
purposes. 

Sec.  19.  The  tribunals  transacting  county  business  shall 
assemble  at  the  county  seats  of  their  respective  counties  on  the 
second  Tuesday  after  each  of  the  elections  provided  for  in  this 
schedule,  and  shall  canvass  the  votes  cast  at  the  elections  held  in 
the  several  precincts  in  their  respective  counties,  and  of  the  coun- 
ties attached  for  municipal  purposes.  They  shall  hold  in  safe 
keeping  the  poll  books  and  tally  lists  of  said  elections,  and  shall, 
within  ten  days  thereafter,  transmit,  by  the  hands  of  a  sworn 
officer,  to  the  President  of  this  convention,  at  the  city  of  Topeka,  a 
certified  transcript  of  the  same,  showing  the  number  of  votes  cast 
for  each  person  or  object  voted  for  at  each  of  the  several  precincts 
in  their  respective  counties,  and  in  the  counties  attached  for 
municipal  purposes,  separately. 

Sec.  20.  The  Governor  of  the  Territory,  and  the  President  and 
Secretary  of  the  convention  shall  constitute  a  board  of  State  can- 
vassers, any  two  of  whom  shall  be  a  quorum;  and  who  shall,  on 
the  fourth  Monday  after  each  of  the  elections  provided  for  in  this 
schedule,  assemble  at  said  city  of  Topeka,  and  proceed  to  open 
and  canvass  the  votes  cast  at  the  several  precincts  in  the  different 
counties  of  the  Territory,  and  declare  the  result;  and  shall  imme- 
diately issue  certificates  of  election  to  all  persons  (if  any)  thus 
elected. 


APPENDIX.  381 

Sec.  21.  Said  board  of  State  canvassers  shall  issue  their  pro- 
clamation not  less  than  twenty  days  next  preceding-  each  of  the 
elections  provided  for  in  this  schedule.  Said  proclamation  shall 
contain  an  announcement  of  the  several  elections,  the  qualifica- 
tions of  electors,  the  manner  of  conducting-  said  elections  and  of 
making  the  returns  thereof,  as  in  this  Constitution  provided,  and 
shall  publish  said  proclamation  in  one  newspaper  in  each  of  the 
counties  of  the  Territory  in  which  a  newspaper  may  be  then 
published. 

Sec.  22.  The  board  of  State  canvassers  shall  provide  for  the 
transmission  of  authenticated  copies  of  the  Constitution  to  the 
President  of  the  United  States,  the  president  of  the  senate  and 
speaker  of  the  house  of  representatives. 

Sec.  23.  Upon  official  information  having  been  by  him  received 
of  the  admission  of  Kansas  into  the  Union  as  a  State,  it  shall  be 
the  duty  of  the  Governor-elect  under  the  Constitution,  to  proclaim 
the  same,  and  to  convene  the  legislature  and  do  all  things  else 
necessary  to  the  complete  and  active  organization  of  the  State 
Government. 

Sec.  24.  The  first  legislature  shall  have  no  power  to  make  any 
changes  in  county  lines. 

Sec.  25.  At  the  election  to  be  held  for  the  ratification  or  rejec- 
tion of  this  Constitution,  each  elector  shall  be  permitted  to  vote 
on  the  homestead  provision  contained  in  the  article  on  "Miscellan- 
eous,'' by  depositing  a  ballot  inscribed  "For  the  Homestead,"  or 
"Against  the  Homestead;"  and  if  a  majority  of  all  the  votes  cast 
at  said  election  shall  be  against  said  provision,  then  it  shall  be 
stricken  from  the  Constitution. 


RESOLUTIONS. 

Resolved,  That  the  congress  of  the  United  States  is  hereby 
requested,  upon  the  application  of  Kansas  for  admission  into  the 
Union,  to  pass  an  act  granting  to  the  State  forty-five  hundred 
thousand  acres  of  land  to  aid  in  the  construction  of  railroads  and 
other  internal  improvements. 

Resolved,^  That  congress  be  further  requested  to  pass  an  act 
appropriating  fifty  thousand  acres  of  land  for  the  improvement  of 
the  Kansas  river  from  its  mouth  to  Fort  Riley. 

Besolved,  That  congress  be  further  requested  to  pass  an  act 
granting  all  swamp  lands  within  the  State  for  the  benefit  of 
common  schools. 

ResoIved,^  That  congress  be  further  requested  to  pass  an  act 
appropriating  five  hundred  thousand  dollars,  or  in  lieu  thereof 


382 


CONSTITUTION. 


five  hundred  thousand  acres  of  land,  for  the  payment  of  the  claims 
awarded  to  citizens  of  Kansas  by  the  claim  commissioners  appointed 
by  the  Governor  and  legislature  of  Kansas  under  an  act  of  the 
Territorial  legislature  passed  7th  of  February,  1859. 

Resolved,  That  the  legislature  shall  make  provision  for  the  sale 
or  disposal  of  the  lands  granted  to  the  State  in  aid  of  internal 
improvements  and  for  other  purposes,  subject  to  the  same  rights 
of  pre-emption  to  the  settlers  thereon  as  are  now  allowed  by  law 
to  settlers  on  the  public  lands. 

Resolved,  That  it  is  the  desire  of  the  people  of  Kansas  to  be 
admitted  into  the  Union  with  this  Constitution. 

Resolved,  That  congress  be  further  requested  to  assume  the  debt 
of  this  Territory. 

Done  in  convention  at  Wyandotte,  this  29th  day  of  July,  A.  D. ,  1859. 

James  M.  Winchell, 

President  and  Member  from  Osage  County. 


Jambs  M,  Arthur,  Linn  Co. 
James  Blood,  Douglas  Co. 
N.  C.  Blood,  Douglas  Co. 
James  G.  Blunt,  Anderson  Co. 
J.  C.  Burnett,  Bourbon  Co, 
John  Taylor   Burris,   Johnson 

Co. 
Allen  Crocker,  Coffey  Co. 
W.  P.  DUTTON,  Lykins  Co. 
RoBT.  Graham,  Atchison  Co. 
John  P.  Greer,  Shawnee  Co. 
Wm.  R.  Griffith,  Bourbon  Co. 
James  Hanway,  Franklin  Co. 
Saml.  E.  Hoffman,  Woodson  Co. 
S.  D.  Houston,  Riley  Co. 
Wm.  Hutchinson,  Douglas  Co. 
John  James  Ingalls,   Atchison 

Co. 


Samuel  A.  Kingman,  Brown  Co. 
JosiAH  Lamb,  Linn  Co. 
George  H.  Lillie,  Madison  Co. 
Caleb  May,  Atchison  Co. 
Wm.  McCullough,  Morris  Co. 
J.  A.  MiDDLBTON,  Marshall  Co. 
Luther  R.  Palmer,  Pottawatomie 

Co. 
RoBT.  J.  Porter,  Doniphan  Co. 
H.  D.  Preston,  Shawnee  Co. 
John  Ritchie,  Shawnee  Co. 
Edmund  G.  Ross,  Wabaunsee  Co. 
James  A.  Signor,  Allen  Co. 
Benjamin  F.  Simpson,  Lykins  Co. 
Edwin  Stokes,  Douglas  Co. 
Solon  O.  Thacher,  Douglas  Co, 
P.  H.  TowNSEND,  Douglas  Co. 
R.  L.  Williams,  Douglas  Co. 


Attest:   JOHN  A.  MARTIN,  Secretary. 


The  following  named  delegates  did  not  sign  the  Constitution: 


J.  T.  Barton,  Johnson  Co. 
Fred.  Brown,  Leavenworth  Co 
J.  W.  FoRMAN,  Doniphan  Co. 
RoBT.  Cole  Foster,  Leavenworth 

Co. 
Sam.  HippLE,  Leavenworth  Co. 
E.  M.  Hubbard,  Doniphan  Co. 
C.  B.  McClelland,  Jefferson  Co. 
Wm.  C.  McDowell,  Leavenworth 

Co. 


A.  D.  McCuNE,  Leave;iworth  Co. 
E.  Moore,  Jackson  Co. 

P.  S.  Parks,  Leavenworth  Co. 
Wm.  Perry,  Leavenworth  Co. 
John  P.  Slough,  Leavenworth  Co. 
J.  Stiarwalt,  Doniphan  Co. 
S.  A.  Stinson,  Leavenworth  Co. 

B.  Wrigley,  Doniphan  Co. 
John  Wright,  Leavenworth  Co. 
T.  S.  Wright,  Nemaha  Co. 


KANSAS  GOVERNMENT. 


Complete  List  of  Territorial  and  State  Officers  from  the  Organi- 
zation OF  THE  Territory  of  Kansas  to  December,  1900. 


KANSAS    TERRITORIAL   OFFICERS— 1854-1861. 

GOVERNORS  AND  ACTING  GOVERNORS. 

Andrew  H.  Reeder,  July  7,  1854.  to  April  17.  1855. 

Daniel   Woodson,  acting,  Aoril   17,   1855,   to  June  23,   1855. 

Andrew  H.  Reeder,  June  2:>>,   1855,  to  August  IG,   1855. 

Daniel  Woodson,  acting,  August  IG,   1855,  to  September  7,  1855. 

Wilson    Shannon,    September   7,    1855,   to  June   24,    1856. 

Daniel  Woodson,  acting,  June  24,   1856,  to  July  7,  1856. 

Wilson  Shannon,  July  7,  1856,  to  August  18,   1856. 

Daniel  Woodson,   acting,   August   18,   1856,  to  September  9,   1856. 

John  W.  Geary,  September  9,  1856,  to  March  12,  1857. 

Daniel  Woodson,  acting,  March  12,  1857,  to  April  16,  1857. 

Frederick  P.  Stanton,  acting,  April  16,  1857,  to  May  27,  1857. 

Robert  J.  Walker,  May  27,   1857,  to  November  16,   1857. 

Frederick   P.   Stanton,   acting,   November   16,    1857,   to  December  21,   1857. 

James  W.  Denver,  acting,  December  21,   1857,  to  May  12,   1858. 

James  W.  Denver,  May  12,  1858,  to  July  3,  1858. 

Hugh  S.  Walsh,  acting,  July  n,  1858,  to  July  HO,  1858. 

James  W.  Denver,  July  ?>0,  1858,  to  October"  10,  1858. 

Hugh  S.  Walsh,  acting,  October  10,  1858,  to  December  18,  1858. 

Samuel  Medary,  December  18,   1858,  to  August  1,  1859. 

Hugh  S.  Walsh,  acting,  August  1,  1859,  to  September  15,  1859. 

Samuel  Medary,  September  15,   1859,  to  April  15,  1860.      . 

Hugh  S.  Walsh,  acting,  April   15,  1860,  to  June  16,  1860. 

Samuel  Medary,  June  16,  1860,  to  September  11,  1860. 

George  M.   Beebe,  acting,   September  11,   1860,   to  November  25,   1860. 

Samuel  Medary,  Noveml)er  25,  1860,  to  December  17,  18(iO. 

SECRETARIES. 

Daniel  Wood.son.  Term,  June  29,  1854,  to  April  16,  1857.  Commissioned 
June  29,  1854. 

Frederick  P.  Stanton.  Term,  April  16  to  December  21,  1857.  Commis- 
sioned March  31,   1857. 

James  W.  Denver.  Term,  December  21,  1857,  to  May  12,  1858.  Commis- 
sioned December   11,   1857. 

Hugh  Sleight  Walsh.     Term,  May  12,  1858,   to  June  28,  1860. 

George  M.  Beebe.  Term,  July  1,  1860,  to  February  9,  1861.  Appointed 
May  1,  1860. 

383 


384  APPENDIX. 


AUDITORS. 

John  Donaldson.     Term,  August  30,   1855,  to  February  20,   1857. 
Hiram  Jackson  S trickier.     Term,  February  20,  1857,  to  February,  1861. 

TREASURERS. 

Thomas  J.  B.  Cramer.     Term,  August  80,  1855,  to  February,  1859. 
Robert  R.  Mitchell.     Term,  February  11,   1859,  to  February,  1861. 

ATTORNEYS     GENERAL. 

Andrew  Jackson  Isacks.     Term,  June,   1854,  to  1857. 

William  Weer.     1858. 

Alson  C.  Davis.     Term,  June  5,  1858,  to  February,  1861. 

SUPERINTENDENTS    OF    SCHOOLS. 

James  H.  Noteware.  Term,  March  1  to  December  1,  1858.  Appointed 
February  12,  1858. 

Samuel  Wiley  Greer.  Term,  December  1,  1858,  to  January  2,  1861. 
Elected  October  4,  1858. 

John  C.  Douglass.  Term,  January  2  to  February,  1801.  Elected  Novem- 
ber 6,  1860. 

TERRITORIAL    CHIEF    JUSTICE. 

Samuel  Dexter  Locompte.     Term,  October  3,  1854^  to  March  9,  1859. 
John  Pettit.     Term,  March  9,  1859,  to  February,   1861. 

ASSOCIATE    JUSTICES. 

Saunders  W.  Johnston.     Term,  June  29,  1854,  to  September  13,  1855. 

J.  M.   Burrell.     Term   September   13,   1855.     Served  but  a  few  weeks,  and 

returned  home,  dying  in  1856. 
Thomas  Cunningham.     Term,  November  19,  1856,  to  .Tune  3,  1857. 
Joseph  Williams.     Term,  June  3,  1857,  to  January,   1861. 
Rush  Elmore.     Term,  June  29,  1854,  to  September  13,  1855. 
Sterling  G.  Cato.     Term,   September  13,   1855,  to  July,  1858. 
Rush  Elmore.     Term,  July,  1858,  to  January,  1861. 


STATE    OFFICERS    OF    KANSAS— 1861-1909. 

GOVERNORS. 

Charles  Robinson,  Lawrence.  Elected  December  6,  1859.  Took  oath  of 
office  February  9,   1861. 

Thomas  Carney,  Leavenworth.     Elected  November  4,   1862. 

Samuel  J.  Crawford,  Garnett.  Elected  November  8,  1864.  Twice  elected. 
Resigned  Novemb(>r  4,  1808,  to  take  command  19th  Reg. 

Nohemiah  (iroen.  Manhattan.  Acting  Governor.  Elected  Lieutenant-Gov- 
ernor November  6,   1866. 

James  M.  Harvey,  Fort  Riley.  Elected  November  3,  1868.  Served  two 
terms. 

Thomas  A.  Osborn,  Leavenworth.  Elected  November  5,  1872.  Served 
two  terms. 

George  T.  Anthony,  Leavenworth.     Elected  November  7,  1876. 

John  P.  St.  John,  Olathe.     Elected  November  5,  1878.     Served  two  terms. 

CJeorge  W.  Glick,  Atchison.     Elected  November  7,   1882. 

John  A.  Martin,  Atchison.     Elected  November  4,   1884.     Served  two  terms. 

Lyman  IJ.  llumphi-ey,  Independence.  Elected  November  6,  1888.  Served 
two  terms. 


STATE  OFFICERS  OF  KANSAS--1861-1909.  385 

Lorenzo  D.  Lewelling,  Wichita.     Elected  November  8,  1892. 

Edmund  N.  Morrill,  Hiawatha.     Elected  November  6,  1894. 

John  W.  Leedy,  Le  Roy.     Elected  November  3,  1896. 

William    E.    Stanley,    Wichita.      Elected    November    8,    1898.      Served    two 

terms. 
Willis  Joshua  Bailey,  Baileyville.     Elected  November  4,   1902. 
Edward  W.   Hoch,  Marion.      Elected   November  8,   1904.     Re-elected,   1906. 
W.  R.  Stubbs,  Lawrence.     Elected  November  3,  1908. 


LIEUTENAXT-GOVIORXORS. 

Joseph    P.    Root,    Wyandotte.      Elected   December   6,    1859.      Took    oath    of 

office  February  9,  1861. 
Thomas  A.  Osborn,  Elwood.     Elected  November  4,   1862. 
James  Mc<irew,   Wyandotte.     Elected  November  8,   1864. 
Nehemiah  Green,  jNIanhattan.     Elected  November  6,  1866. 
Charles  V.  Eskridge,  Emporia.     Elected  November  3,   1868. 
Peter  P.  Elder,  Ottawa.     Elected  November  8,  1870. 
Ellas  S.   Stovjer,  Council  Grove.     Elected  November  5.  1872. 
Melville   J.    Salter,    Thayer.      Elected   November   3,    1874.      Twice   elected. 

Resigned  July  19,  1877. 
Lyman  U.  Humphrey,  Independence.     Elected  November  6,  1877.     Elected, 

vice  Salter,  resigned.     Re-elected  November  5,  1878. 
D.    W.    Finney,    Neosho    Falls.      Elected    November    2,    1880.      Served    two 

terms. 
Alex.  P.  Riddle,  Girard.     Elected  November  4,  1884.     Served  two  terms. 
Andrew  J.  Felt,  Senica.     Elected  November  6,  1888.     Served  two  terms. 
I'ercy  Daniels,  Girard.     Elected  November  8,   1892. 
James  A.  Troutman,  Topeka.     Elected  November  6,   1894. 
A.  M.  Harvey,  Topeka.     Elected  November  3,   1896. 
H.   E.    Richter,    Council  Grove.      Elected   November   8,    1898.      Served    two 

terms. 
David  J.  Hanna,  Hill  City.     Elected  November  4,   1902.     Re-elected  1904. 
W.  J.  Fitzgerald,  Dodge  City.     Elected  1906.     Re-elected  1908. 

SECRETARIES    OF    STATE. 

John  Winter  Robinson,  Manhattan.  Elected  December  6,  1859.  Took  oath 
of  office  1861.     Removed  July  28,  1862. 

Sanders  Rufus  Shepherd,  Topeka.     Appointed,  vice  Robinson,  August,  1862. 

Wm.  Wirt  Henry  Lawrence,  Peoria  City.     Elected  November  4,  1862. 

Rinaldo  Allen  Barker,  Atchison.  Elected  November  8,  1864.  Served  two 
terms. 

Thomas  Moonlight,  Leavenworth.     Elected  November  3,   1868. 

Wm.  Hillary  Smallwood,  Wathena.  Elected  November  8,  1870.  Served 
two  terms. 

Thos.  H.  Cavanaugh,  Salina.  Elected  November  3,  1874.  Served  two 
terms. 

James  Smith,  Marysville.     Elected  November  5,  1878.     Served  three  terms. 

Edwin  Bird  Allen,  Wichita.     Elected  November  4.  1884.     Served  two  terms. 

William  Higgins,  Topeka.     Elected  November  6.   1888.     Served  two  terms. 

Russel  Scott  Osborn,  Stockton.     Elected  November  8,  1892. 

Wm.  Congdon  PJdwards,  Larned.     Elected  November  6.  1894. 

William  Eben  Bush,  Mankato.     Elected  November  3,  1896. 

George  Alfred  Clark,  Junction  City.  Elected  November  8,  1898.  Re-elected 
1900. 

Joel  Randall  Burrow,  Smith  Centre.  Elected  November  4,  3  902  Re- 
elected 1904. 

C.  E.  Denlon,  Alliea.     Elected  190(i.      Re-elected  1908. 


386  APPENDIX, 

AUDITORS. 

George  Shaler  Hillyer,  Grasshopper  Falls.  Elected  December  6,  1859. 
Took  oath  of  office  February,  1861.     Removed  July  28,  1862. 

David  Long  Lakin,  Grasshopper  Falls.  Appointed,  vice  Hillyer,  August, 
1862. 

Asa  Hairgrove,  Mound  City.     Elected  November  4,  1862. 

John  R.  Swallow,  Emporia.     Elected  November  8,  1864.     Served  two  terms. 

Alois  Thoman,  Lawrence.     Elected  November  3,  1868.     Served  two  terms. 

Daniel  Webster  Wilder,  Fort  Scott.  Elected  November  5,  1872.  Twice 
elected  ;  resigned  September  20,  1876. 

Parkinson  Isaiah  Bonebrake,  Topeka.     Appointed  October  2,  1876. 

Parkinson  I.  Bonebrake,  Topeka.  Elected  November  7,  1876.  Twice  re- 
elected. 

Edward  P.  McCabe,  Millbrook.  Elected  November  7,  1882.  Served  two 
terms.  ' 

Timothy  McCarthy,  Earned,  Elected  November  2,  1886.  Served  two 
terms. 

Charles  Merrill  Hovey,  Colby.     Elected  November  4,  1890. 

Van  B.  Prather,  Columbus.     Elected  November  8,  1892. 

George  Ezekiel  Cole,  Girard.     Elected  November  6,  1894. 

William  H.  Morris,  Pittsburg.     Elected  November  3,  1896. 

George  Ezekiel  Cole,  Pittsburg.     Elected  November  8,  1898. 

Seth  Grant  Wells,  Erie.    Elected  November  4,  1902.     Re-elected  in  -1904. 

J.  M.  Nation,  Erie.     Elected  1906.     Re-elected  1908. 


TREASDRERS. 

William  Tholen,  Leavenworth.     Elected  December  6,  1859.     Entered  army 

and  did  not  qualify. 
Hartwin  R.  Dutton,  Hiawatha.     Appointed  by  Governor  March  26,  1861. 
Hartwin  R.   Dutton,   Hiawatha.     Elected  November  5,  1861.     Elected  for 

remainder  of  term. 
William  Spriggs,  Garnett.     Elected  November  4,  1862.     Served  two  terms. 
Martin  Anderson,  Circleville.     Elected  November  6,  1866. 
George  Graham,  Seneca.     Elected  November  3,  1868. 
Josiah  Emery  Hayes,  Olathe.     Elected  November  8,  1870.     Twice  elected. 

Resigned  April  30,  1874. 
John  Francis,  lola.     Appointed,  vice  Hayes,  May  1,  1874. 
Samuel  Lappin,   Seneca.     Elected  November  3,   1874.     Resigned  December 

20,  1875. 
John  Francis,  lola.     Appointed,  vice  Lappin,  December  21,  1875. 
John  Francis,  lola.     Elected  November  7,  1876.     Elected  and  served  three 

regular  terms. 
Samuel  T.  Howe,  Marion.     Elected  November  7,  1882.     Served  two  terms. 
James   Wm.   Hamilton,   Wellington.      Elected  November   2,   1886.     Elected 

for  two  terms.     Resigned  March  1,  1890. 
William    Sims,    Topeka.      Appointed,    vice   Hamilton,   March   1,    1890,   and 

served  until  December  30,  1890. 
Solomon  G.   Stover,  Belleville.     Elected  November  4,   1890.     Elected,   vice 

Hamilton,  and  for  next  regular  term. 
Wm.  Henry  Biddle,  Augusta.     Elected  November  8,  1892. 
Otis  L.  Atherton,  Russell.     Elected  November  6,  1894, 
David  H.  lieflebower,  Bucyrus.     Elected  November  3,  1896. 
Frank  E.  Grimes,  Leoti.     Elected  November  8,  1898. 
Thomas  T.  Kelly,  Paola.     Elected  November  4.  1902.     Re-elected  1904. 
Mark  TuUy,   Independence.     Elected  1906.      Re-elected  1908. 


STATE  OFFICERS  OF  KANSAS— 1861-1909.  337 

ATTOUNEYS-GENKKAL. 

Benjamin  Franklin  Simpson,  Paola.     Eloctod  December  6,  1859.     Resigned 

July.  18G1. 
Charles  Chadwick,  Lawrence.     Appointed,  vice  Simpson,  July  30,  1801. 
Samuel  A.  Stinson,  Leavenworth.     Elected  November  5,  1861. 
Warren  Wm.  Guthrie.  Carson.     Elected  November  4.  1862. 
Jerome  D.  Brumbaugh,  Marysville.     Elected  November  8,  1864. 
George  Henry  Hoyt,  Leavenworth.     Elected  November  6.  1866. 
Addison  Danford.  Fort  Scott.     Elected  November  3.  1868. 
Archibald  L.   Williams,   Topeka.     Elected  November  8,   1870.     Served  two 

terms. 
Asa  M.  F.  Randolph.  Burlington.     Elected  November  3,  1874. 
Willard  Davis,  Oswego.     Elected  November  7,  1876.     Served  two  terms. 
William   A.   Johnston,   Minneapolis.    •  Elected  November  2.    1880.     Elected 

for    two    terms.      Resigned    December    1,    1884,    to    become    Associate 

Justice. 
George  P.  Smith,  Humboldt.     Appointed,  vice  Johnston  ;  resigned  December 

1,  1884. 
Simeon  Briggs  Bradford,  Carbondale.     Elected  November  4,  1884.     Served 

two  terms. 
Lyman  Beecher  Kellogg,  Emporia.     Elected  November  6,  1888. 
John  Nutt  Ives,  Sterling.     Elected  November  4,  1890. 
John  Thomas  Little,  Olathe.     Elected  November  8.  1892. 
Fernando  B.  Dawes,  Clay  Centre.     Elected  November  6,  1894. 
Louis  C.  Boyle.  Fort  Scott.     Elected  November  3,  1896. 
Aretas  A.  Godard.  Topeka.     Elected  November  8.  1898. 
Charles    Crittenden    Coleman,    Clav    Centre.      Elected    November   4,    1902. 

Re-elected  1904. 
F.  S.  Jackson,  Eureka.     Elected  1906.     Re-elected  1908. 


SUPERINTENDENTS   PUBLIC    INSTRUCTION. 

William  Riley  Griffith,  Marmaton.     Elected  December  6,  1859.     Took  oath 

of  office  February.  1861.     Died  February  12,  1862. 
Simeon   Montgomery  Thorp,   Lawrence.      Appointed   to   fill   vacancy,  March 

28,  1862. 
Isaac  T.   Goodnow,   Manhattan.     Elected   November  4,    1862.      Served  two 

terms. 
Peter  McVicar,  Topeka.     Elected  November  6,   1866.     Served  two  terms. 
Hugh  DeFrance  McCarty,  Leavenworth.     Elected  November  8,  1870.    Served 

two  terms. 
John  Fra.ser,  Lawrence.     Elected  November  3,  1874. 
Allen  Borsley  Lemmon,  Wintield.     Elected  November  7,  1876.     Served  two 

terms. 
Henry  Clay  Speer,  Junction  City.     Elected  November  2,  1880.     Served  two 

terms. 
Joseph  Hadden  Lawhead,  Fort  Scott.     Elected  November  4,  1884.     Served 

two   terms. 
George  Wesley  Winans,  Junction  City.     Elected  November  6,  1888.     Served 

two  terms. 
Henry   Newton   Gaines,    Salina.      Elected   November   8,    1892. 
Edmund  Stanley,  Lawrence.     Elected  November  6,  1894. 
William    Stryker,    Great    Bend.      Elected    November   3,    1896. 
Frank  Nelson,   Lindsborg.     Elected  November  8.   1898.     Served  two  terms. 
Insley   L.    Dayhoff,    Hutchinson,      Elected    November   4,    1902.      Re-elected. 

1904, 
E.  T.  Fairchild,   Ellpworth.     Elected  1906.     Re-elected   1908, 


388  APPENDIX. 

,  CHIEF    JUSTICES. 

Thomas  Ewing,   Jr.,   Leavenworth.     Elected  December  6,   1859.     Resigned 

November  28,  1862. 
Nelson  Cobb,  Lawrence.     Appointed,  vice  Ewing,  November  28,  1862. 
Robert  Crozier,  Leavenworth.     Elected  November  3,   1863. 
Samuel  Austin  Kingman,   Atchison.      Elected  November  6,   1866. 
Samuel  Austin  Kingman,  Atchison.     Ele.cted  November  5,  1872.     Resie-ned 

December   30,    1876. 
Albert    Howell    Horton,    Atchison.      Appointed,    vice    Kingman,    December 

ol,   18  <  D. 
Albert   Howell   Horton,   Atchison.     Elected  November  6,   1877. 
Albert  Howell   Horton,  Atchison.     Elected  November  5,   1878. 
Albert   Howell    Horton,   Atchison.      Elected   November  4,    1884. 
Albert   Howell    Horton,   Atchison.      Elected  November  4,    1890.      Resigned 

April  30,  1895. 
David  Martin,  Atchison.     Appointed,  vice  Horton,  April  30,  1895. 
David  Martin,  Atchison.     Elected  November  4,  1895. 
Frank  Doster,  Marion.     Elected  November  3,  1896. 
William  Agnew  Johnston,   Minneapolis.     Elected  November  4,  1902. 

ASSOCIATE   JUSTICES. 

Samuel  A.  Kingman,  Hiawatha.    Elected  December  6,  1859. 

Jacob  Safford,  Topeka.     Elected  November  8,  1864. 

David  Josiah  Brewer,  Leavenworth.     Elected  November  8,   1870. 

David  Josiah  Brewer,  Leavenworth.     Elected  November  7,  1876. 

David  Josiah  Brewer.  Leavenworth.  Elected  November  7,  1882.  Re- 
signed April  8,  1884. 

Theodore  A.  Hurd,  Leavenworth.     Appointed,  vice  Brewer,  April  12,  1884. 

William  A.  Johnston.  Minneapolis.  Elected  November  4.  1884.  Elected, 
vice  Brewer.  Resigned  office  of  Attorney-General  of  Kansas,  December 
1,  1884,  to  become  Associate  Justice. 

William  A.  Johnston,  Minneapolis.     Elected  November  6,  1888. 

William  A.  Johnston,  Minneapolis.     Elected  November  6,  1894. 

Lawrence  Dudley  Bailey,  Emporia.     Elected  December  6,  1859. 

Lawrence  Dudley  Bailey,  Emporia.     Elected  November  4,  1862. 

Daniel  Mulford  Valentine,  Ottawa.     Elected  November  3,   1868. 

Daniel  Mulford  Valentine,  Ottawa.     Elected  November  3,   1874. 

Daniel  Mulford  Valentine,  Topeka.     Elected  November  2,   1880. 

Daniel  Mulford  Valentine,  Topeka.     Elected  November  2.   1886. 

Stephen   H.    Allen,   Pleasanton.      Elected  November  8.   1892. 

William   Redwood   Smith,   Kansas   City.      Elected  November   8,    1904. 

Edwin  W.  Cunningham,  Emporia.  Appointed  January  15,  1901.  Elected 
November   7,   1902.      Re-elected  November  8,   1904. 

Adrian  L.  Greene,  Newton.  Appointed  January  15,  1901.  Elected  Novem- 
ber 4.  1902.     Died  July  27,  1907. 

Abram  H.  Ellis,  Beloit.  Appointed  January  15,  1901.  Died  September 
25,   1902. 

Rosseau  A.  Burch,  Salina.  Appointed  September  29,  1902,  to  vacancy 
caused  by  the  death  of  Justice  Ellis.     Elected  November  4,   1902. 

John  C.  Pollock,  Winfield.  Apoointed  January  15,  1901.  Elected  Novem- 
ber 4.  1902.     Resigned  December  2,   1903. 

William  D.  Atkinson.  Parsons.     Appointed,  vice  Pollock,  January  1,  1904. 

Henry  F.  Mason,   Garden  City.     Elected  November  4,   1902. 

Clark  A.   Smith.  Cawker  City.     Elected  November  8,   1904. 

Silas  Porter.  Kansas  City.     Elected  November   1906. 

Charles  B.  Graves.  Emporia.     Elected  November  1906. 

A.  W.  Benson.  Ottawa.  Appointed  to  fill  vacancy  caused  by  death  of  A.  L. 
Greene.     Elected  November  6,   1908. 


STATE  OFFICERS  OF  KANSAS— 1861-1909.  389 

UNITED    STATES    SENATORS. 
LANE    SUCCESSION. 

James  H.  Lane,  Lawrence.     Elected  April  4,  1861. 

James  H.  Lane,  Lawrence.  Elected  January  12,  1865.  Died  July  11, 
1866. 

Edmund  G.  Ross,  Lawrence.     Appointed,  vice  Lane,  July  20,  1866. 

Edmund  G.  Ross,  Lawrence.  Elected  January  23,  1867.  Elected  to  fill 
vacancy,  vice  Lane. 

Alexander  Caldwell,  Leavenworth.  Elected  January  25,  1871.  Resigned 
March  24,   1873. 

Robert  Crozier,  Leavenworth.  Appointed,  vice  Caldwell,  November  22, 
1873. 

James  M.  Harvey,  Vinton.  Elected  February  2,  1874.  Elected,  vice 
Caldwell. 

Preston  B.   Plumb,  Emporia.     Elected  January  31,   1877. 

Preston  B.   Plumb,   Emporia.     Elected  January  24,   1883. 

Preston  B.  Plumb,  Emporia.  Elected  January  23,  1889.  Died  at  Wash- 
ington. December  20,  1891. 

Bishop  W.  Perkins,  Oswego.     Appointed,  vice  Plumb,  January  1,  1892. 

John  Martin,  Topeka.     Elected  January  25,   1893.     Elected,  vice  Plumb. 

Lucien  Baker,  Leavenworth.     Elected  January  23,  1895. 

Joseph  Ralph  Burton,   Abilene.     Elected  January  — ,   1901. 

A.  \Y.  Benson.     Appointed  November  1906. 

Charles  Curtis.     Elected  January   1907. 


POMEROy    SUCCESSION. 

Samuel   C.    Pomeroy,    Atchison.      Elected   April   4,    1861. 
Samuel  C.  Pomeroy,  Atchison.     Elected  January  23,  1867. 
John  James  Ingalls,   Atchison.      Elected  January   29,   1873. 
John  James   Ingalls,   Atchison.     Elected  January   31,   1879. 
John   James   Ingalls,   Atchison.     Elected  January   28,   1885. 
William  Alfred  PefEer.   Topeka.      Elected  January   28.   1891. 
William  A.   Harris,  Linwood.     Elected  January  27,   1897. 
Chester   I.   Long.   Medicine   Lodge.      Elected  January   — ,    1903. 
J,  L.  Bristow,  Salina.     Elected  January  1909. 


CONGRESSMEN. 

Martin   F.   Conwav,    Lawrence.      1861-'63. 

Abel   Carter   Wilder,    Leavenworth.      186.3-'6r>, 

Sidney  Clarke,   Lawrence.     1865-'71. 

David   P.    Lowe,    Fort   Scott.      1871-'75. 

Stephen  Alonzo  Cobb.  Wyandotte.     1873-'75. 

William  Addison  Phillips.   Salina.      1873-'79. 

William   R.    Brown,    Hutchinson.      1875-'77. 

John  R.  Goodin,   Humboldt.     1875-'77. 

Dudley  C.   Haskell,  Lawrence.      1877-'83. 

Thomas  Ryan,  Topeka.     1877-'89. 

John    Alexander    Anderson,    Manhattan.      1S79-'91. 

Edwin   N.   Morrill,   Hiawatha.      1883-'91. 

Samuel   Ritter  Peters,   Newton.      1888-'91. 

Lewis   Hanback,    Osborne.      lS83-'87. 

Bishop   W.   Perkins,   Oswego.      188.3-'91. 

Edward   Hogue   Funston,    lola.      1883-'93. 

lOrastus   J.   Turner,   Hoxie.      1887-'91. 

Harrison   Kelley,    Burlington.      1S89-'91. 


390  '  APPENDIX. 


Case   Broderick,   Holton.      1891-'99. 

B.   H.   Clover,   Cambridge.      1891-'93. 

John   Davis,    Junction   City.      1891-'95. 

Jerry    Simpson,    Medicine   Lodge.      1891-'95,    1897-'99. 

Jolin   Grant   Otis,   Topeka.      1891-'93. 

William  Baker,   Lincoln.      1891-'97. 

William   Alexander   Harris,   Linwood.      1893-'95. 

Horace   L.   Moore,   Lawrence.      189o-'95. 

Charles   Curtis,    Topeka.      1893-1905. 

Thomas  J.   Hudson,   Fredonia.      1893-'95. 

Richard   W.    Blue,    Pleasanton.      1895-'97. 

Orrin   L.    Miller,    Kansas   City.      1895-'97. 

Snyder  S.  Kirkpatrick,  Fredonia.     1895-'97. 

William    A.    Calderhead,    Marysville.       1895-*97,    1899-1905. 

Chester  I.  Long,  Medicine  Lodge.     1895-'97.     1899-1905. 

Jeremiah   Dunham   Botkin,    Winfleld.      1897-'99. 

Mason    Summers    Peters,    Kansas    City.      1897-'99. 

N.   B.   McCormick,    Phillipsburg.      1897-'99. 

Edwin   Reed   Ridgely,    Pittsburg.      1897-1901. 

William  D.  Vincent,  Clay  Centre.     1897-'99. 

Willis   Joshua   Bailey,    Baileyville.      1899-1901. 

Justin    DeWitt   Bowersock,    Lawrence.      1899-1905. 

James  Monroe  Miller,  Council  Grove.     1899-.  , 

William  Augustus  Reeder,  Logan.     1899-. 

Charles  Frederick  Scott,  lola.     1901-. 

Alfred  Metcalf  Jackson,   Winfield.      1901-'08. 

Phillip  Pitt  Campbell,  Pittsburg.     1903-. 

Victor  Murdock,   Wichita.      1903-. 

D.  R.  Anthony,  Jr.,  Leavenworth.     1907-. 

E.  H.  Madison,  Garden  City.     1907-. 


STATE    PRINTERS. 

S.    S.  Prouty,   Burlingame.     Elected   1869. 

S.    S.   Prouty,   Burlingame.     Elected  1871. 

George   W.    Martin,    Junction   City.      Elected    1873. 

George    W.    Martin,   Junction    City.      Elected   1875. 

George    W.    Martin,   Junction    City.      Elected   1877. 

George   W.    Martin,    Junction   City.      Elected    1879. 

T.  Dwight  Thatcher,   Lawrence.     Elected  1881. 

T.   Dwight  Thatcher,   Lawrence.      Elected   1883. 

T.  Dwight  Thatcher,  Lawrence.     Elected   1885. 

Clifford    C.    Baker,    Topeka.      Elected    1887. 

Clifford    C.    Baker,    Topeka.      P]lected    1889. 

E.   H.   Snow,  Ottawa.      Elected  1891. 

E.  H.   Snow,  Ottawa.     Elected  1893. 

J.    K.    Hudson.    Topeka.      Elected   1895. 

J.   S.   Parks,   Beloit.     Elected   1897. 

W.    y.    Morgan,    Hutchinson.      Elected    1899. 

W.    Y.    Morgan,    Hutchinson.      Elected    1901. 

George  A.  Clark,  Topeka.     Elected  1903. 

T.    A.    McNeal,    Topeka.      Elected   1906. 

T.   A.   McNeal,   Topeka.     Elected  1908. 


INDEX 


Abbot,  Capt.,  100. 

Abilene,  184. 

Act  of  1850,  57. 

Adams,  Franklin  G.,  166,  314. 

Adams,  John  Quincy,  67. 

Ad  Astra  per  Aspera,  142. 

Ady,  Joseph  W.,  242. 

Agriculture,  247,   256. 

Agricultural  College.  See  State  Ag- 
ricultural  College. 

Aid,  195. 

Aguinaldo,  265. 

Alameda,  42. 

Alien  Land  Law,  236. 

Alexis,  Grand  Duke,  185. 

Alfalfa,  237,  238,  293. 

Alford,  Lieut.,  266. 

Allen,  Henry  J.,  280. 

Allen,  Associate  Justice,  244. 

Allegany  Mountains,  24. 

AUerton,  Ellen  P.,  214,  305. 

Altitude,  Average,  11. 

Amendment  to  Constitution,  196, 
203,  236. 

American  Exploration,  31,  41. 

Anderson,  John  A.,  198,  238. 

Andreas'  History  of  Kansas,  7,  303. 

Annals  of  Kansas,  7,  303. 

Anti-Cigarette  Law,  288. 

Anti-Pass  Law,  285. 

Anti-Slavery  Societies,  67,  74. 

Anthony,  City  of,  227. 

Anthony's  Administration,  198,  201. 

Anthony,  G.  T.,  196,  200,  253,  317. 

Anthony,  D.  R.,  145. 

Appendix,  310. 

Appellate  Courts.  250. 

Appleton,  \Ms.,  217. 

Arbor  Day,  277. 

Arapahoes,   175. 

Argonia,  219. 

Arickaree,  178. 

Arkansas  City,  229. 

Arkansas  River,  21,  33,  36,  50,  55. 

391 


Arny,  W.  F.  M.,  131. 

Associate  Justices,  387. 
Asylum,  Imbecile  Youth,  215. 
Atchison,  City  of,  32,  75,  125,  204, 

215,  216-17. 
Atchison  Champion,  230. 
Atchison,  David  R.,  72,  80,  96,  106. 
A.,  T.  &  S.  F.  R.  R.,  151,  169,  191, 

278. 
Atlanta,  165. 
Attorneys-General,  386. 
Aubrey,  Fort,  46. 
Auditors  of  State,  385. 


B 


Ragbag,  266. 

Bailey's  Administration,  275-280. 
Bailey,  W.  J.,  273. 
Baptiste  Le  Grande,  44. 
Baptist,  61. 

Barber,  Thomas  W.,  93. 
Barbe,  Marbois,  29. 
Baker  University,  114,  289,  290. 
Baker,   Bishop,   114. 
Baldwin,  114. 
Ball,  Colin  H.,  267. 
Bank  Guarantee  Law,  288. 
Barshfield,  C.  P.,  267. 
Barton  County,  293. 
Battery,  First  Kansas,  147. 
Battleship  Indiana,  263. 
Battleship  Kansas,  282. 
Battleship  Newport,  263. 
Beck,  Col.  J.  M.,  262. 
Bechnell,  Capt.,  44. 
Beebo,  George  W..  121,  127. 
Beecher,  Fred,  180. 
Beecher,  Henry  Ward,  180,  201. 
Beecher  Bible  Co.,  102. 
Beecher,  Island  of,  178. 
Belle  Fountain,  32. 
Beloit,  225. 
Benson,  A.  W.,  387, 
Bent's  Fort,  64, 


393 


INDEX. 


Bernalillo,  19. 

Bethany  College,  20^ 

Bethel  College,  216. 

Bibliography,  7. 

Bickerdyke,  165,  166. 

Biennial  Election  Law,  272. 

Biennial     Sessions    of    Legislature, 

190. 
Big  Springs,  89. 
Big  Blue,  Battle  of,  160. 
Bill  of  Rights,  122. 
Biography,  310. 
Birds  of  Kansas,  239. 
Birds.  Protection  of,  275. 
Bismarck  Grove,  199,  205.  / 
Black  Jack,  98,  134. 
Black,  .Jeremiah  S.,  114. 
Black  Kettle,  178. 
Blackmar,  7. 
Bloomington,  92. 
Blue  Lodges,  74,  81. 
Blue  River,  41,  253. 
Blumont  College,  151. 
Blunt,  124,  149,  159,  160,  165. 
Blunt's  Staff,  Massacre  of,  156. 
Board  of  Control,   282. 
Board  of  Health.  215. 
Bogus  Statutes,  122. 
Bogus  Legislature,  137. 
Bondi,   August,   Quoted,    100. 
Boom,  Kansas,  219. 
Border,  Across  the,  72. 
Boss-Busters,  280. 
Botkin,  J.  D.,  286. 
Boudinot,  59. 

Boundary  of  Kansas.  11,  51,  71,  123. 
Bourgmont,  25-26. 
Branscomb.  76,  218. 
Branson,  Jacob,  90. 
Brewer.  David  J..  230. 
Brewerton,  7,  302. 
Brlstow,  J.  L.,  286,  288. 
Brown,  John,  97,  98,  100,  119,  133- 

130,  250. 
Brown's  Brigade.  162. 
Brown,  Frederick,  100,  134. 
Brown,  G.  W.,  76.  106,  301 
Brown,  Jason,  133. 
Brown,  J.  C,  73. 
Brown,  Mary  A.,  136. 
Bryant,  W.  C,  200. 
Bi-yan,  W.  J.,   254. 
Buffalo,  174,  185,  222. 
Buffalo  Bill,  184. 

Buchanan.  Pres.  James,  127,  168. 
Buford  of  Alabama,  95. 
Butterfield  Overland  Stage  Co.,  130. 
Burton,  J.  R.,  272,  285. 
Butler  County,  211. 
Byron's  Ford,  162. 


Cabeca  de  Vaca,  16-18. 

Cabell,  163. 

Cabin  Creek,  152,  158. 

Catholic,  59,  62,  194. 

Caldwell,   City  of,   229. 

Caldwell,  Alexander,  186,  196. 

California  Road,   48. 

California,  104,  116,  211. 

Caloocan,  206. 

Calumpet,  266-7. 

Calhoun,  Pres.,  111. 

Campbell,  J.  F.,  117. 

Camp  Leedy,  260. 

Camp  Alger,  261. 

Candlebox.  Returns,  113. 

Canfield,  Dr.,  216. 

Capitals,  Territorial,  136. 

Capitol  Building,  275-6-7. 

Carney's  Administration,  149-151.- 

Carney,  Thomas,  159,  222,  312. 

Carnegie,  Andrew,  298. 

Carruth,  W.  H.,  7,  318, 

Carson,  Kit.  41. 

Cattle  Trade,   184. 

Cato,  Judge.  94,  105,  111. 

Cavalry,  Fifth,   Sixth   and  Seventh, 

147. 
Census,  80,  143,  184,  232. 
Centennial,  195. 
Chancellor,  K.  W.,  231. 
Chanute,  252.  257. 
Charleston,  136. 
Chattanooga,  168. 
Chautauqua,  County.  281. 
Cherryvale,  248,  257. 
Cheyennes,  40,  175,  199,  200. 
Chief  Justices  of  State,  387. 
Chief  White  Hair,  33. 
Chickamauga,   105.   108,   201. 
Child  Labor  Law,  282,  288. 
Child,  Maria,  230. 
Chippewas,   58. 

Chouteau's  Trading  Posts,  41. 
Christianity,    22. 
Cibola,  Cities  of,  19,  21. 
Cimarron  Crossing.  44. 
City  of  Mexico,  109. 
Civil  War.   143-108. 
Clark,  George  Rogers,  31. 
Clark,  G.   W.,   116. 
Clay  County,  186. 
Cleveland,  Pres..  212,  240. 
Cloud,  Gen..   166. 
Clover,  B.  H.,  234. 
Clubs,  Kansas  Federation  of,  272-3. 
Coffeyville.  11.  257,  278. 
Coffey,  Col.,  152. 
Coleman,  F.    M.,  90. 
Colleges,  Denominational,  299, 


INDEX. 


393 


Colorado,  44,  160,  195.  211. 

Colored  Troops,  149,  162,  262. 

Colors  of  State,  168. 

Colpetzer,   William,  117. 

Columbian    Exposition,    245-6. 

Comanches,  33,  54,  56,  177. 

Commission,  Government,  in  Cities, 
288. 

Commissioners,  State  Railroad,  233. 

Compostela,  18,  19. 

Compromise  of  1850,  67. 

Congress,  52,  68,  95,  127,  211. 

Congressmen,   388. 

Congressional  Delegate,  First,  80. 

Congressional  Investigation  Com- 
mittee, 95. 

Connelley,  W.  F.,  7. 

Constitutions,  Territorial,  138. 

Constitution,  State,  Making  of, 
121-132. 

Constitution  of  the  State,  with 
Amendments,   Appendix. 

Conway,  Martin  F.,  126. 

Conway  Springs,  226,  228. 

Cooke,  Col.  Phillips  St.  George,  101, 
102,   105,  106. 

Cooper  Memorial  College,  216. 

Cordley,   Dr.,   154,  155. 

Corinth,  149,  164. 

Coronado,  14,  17,  18-23,  44. 

Corn,  227,  257,  293. 

Coxey  Army,  248. 

Couch,  Capt.,  211. 

Council  Grove,  22,  41,  44,  45,  72. 

County,  Description  and  Maps,  320. 

County   Organization,   221. 

County-Seat  Difficulties,   221. 

Cowboy,  184. 

Craddock,  W.  H.,  274. 

Crandall.  Prudence,  196. 

Crawford's  Administration,  172-182. 

Crawford.   Samuel  J.,   170. 

Creeks,  210. 

Crozier,  Robert,  196. 

Cuba,  258. 

Culiacan,  19. 

Curtis,. Gen.,   157.  161.  163,  175. 

Curtis,  Charles  E.,  285. 

Cushing,  Mrs.  Harriet,  273. 

Custer,  178,  247. 


Daniels,  Percy,  241. 

Daughters  of  American  Revolution, 

99,  253.  282.  283,  284,  285. 
Davis,  Jefeerson.  80,  99,  127,  139. 
Delahay,  Mark  W.,  145. 
Deitzler,  Gen.,  145,  146,  159,  166. 
Delassns,  Don  Carlos,  29. 
Delawares,  58. 


Democratic    Party,   70. 

Denver,    .Tames   W.,    112,   113,    116 

119,  120. 
Denver,  City  of,  116. 
De  Soto,  21. 
Dewey,  Admiral,  258. 
Dickinson  County.  21,  186. 
Dillon,  Judge,  208. 
Disaster  of  1874,  194. 
Dodge  City,  21,  184,  251. 
Donaldson,  Marshal,  96,  99. 
Doniphan,  48,  77,  125. 
Douglas,   92,  242. 
Douglas  House,  243-4. 
Douglas,    Stephen   A.,    68,   80,    119. 

228. 
Douglas  County  Grand  Jury,  96. 
Dow,  Charles  M.,  90. 
Doyle,  James  P.,  98. 
Drake,   Sir  Francis,   19. 
Drought  of  1860,  130. 
Dull  Knife,  179. 
Dunsmore,  J.  M.,  242. 
Dunsmore   Flouse,   242-4. 
Dunbar,  Prof.,  71. 
Dutch  Henry's  Crossing,  98. 
Dyche,  Prof.,  246. 
Drywood,   147. 
Drysdale,  W.  S. 


E 


Early  Books,   301-2. 
Earp,  John  E.,  216. 
Easton,  Gen.,  91. 
Economic  Growth,   202-223. 
Educational  Exhibit,  246. 
Educational    Institutions,    114,   151. 

216,   297-299. 
Educational  Report,  248. 
Egypt.  238. 

Eight-Hour  Labor  Law,  236. 
Eighteenth   Kansas,    175. 
Eighth   Infantry,   149. 
Ellsworth,   225. 
Elder,  P.  P.,  223. 
Ellis  County,   186,   193,  222. 
Election  of  1862,   149. 
Election  of  1864,   178. 
Election  of  1868,   181. 
Election  of  1872,   186. 
Election  of  1876,  196. 
Election  of  1878,   201. 
Election  of  1880,  204. 
Election  of  1882,   209. 
Election  of  1884,  212. 
Election  of  1886,  218. 
Election  of   1888,   223. 
Election  of  1890,  234. 
Election  of  1892,  239. 
Election  of  1894,  249, 


394 


H^DEX. 


Election  of  1896,  254. 

Election  of  1898,  264. 

Election  of  1900,   272. 

Election  of  1902,   273. 

Election  of  1904,  280. 

Election  of  1906,   285. 

Election  of  1908,  286. 

Eldridge  House,  96,  153,  284. 

Elliot,  Capt.  D.  G.,  266. 

Eleventh  Cavalry,  165. 

Emigrant  Aid  Society,  New  Eng- 
land,  73-74,   81,  107,  217,   301. 

Emigrant  Aid  Society,  New  York 
and  Connecticut,  74. 

Emigration  Society,  Union  Washing- 
ton, 74. 

Emporia  Normal.  See  State  Nor- 
mal. 

Emporia,  200,  216,  259,  278. 

Emporia  College,  216. 

Enslow,  R.  S.,  267. 

English  Colony,   186. 

English  Bill,  119. 

European  Immigration,  191. 

Escansaques,   22. 

Ewing,  Gen.,   158,  159,  165. 

Exploration,  Period  of,  14-50. 

Exodus,  The,  204. 

Exoduster,  204-205. 


F 


Fagan,  Gen.,  158. 

Famished  Woman's  Fork,  200. 

Farrelly,  Hugh,  286. 

Farmers'   Alliance,   232-234. 

Father  Charles  La  Croix,  59. 

Father  John  Shoenmaker,  59. 

Father  Padilla,  22. 

Fayetteville  Road,  48. 

Filipino  Insurgents.  265,  267. 

Fifteenth  Amendment,   183. 

Finney  County,  221. 

First  Kansas  Infantry,  164. 

First  Kansas  Battery,  165. 

First  Kansas  Militia,  218. 

First  Kansas  Colored,  152. 

First  Montana,  266. 

Fiske,   John,   7. 

Fitch,  Col.  T.  G.,  261. 

Flags,    29.    35,    39,    105,    144,    244, 

266,  285. 
Flenniken,  R.  P.,  80. 
Flood  of  '44,  130. 
Flood  Years,  1903-1904,  277. 
Florida,  16. 

Fourth  of  July  Creek,  32. 
Four  American  Pioneers,  41. 
Franklin,  Mo.,  44. 
Pranklin,   Fort,  91,   99,   100. 
Frankfort,  253. 


Francis,  Gov.,  228,  280. 
Fraser,  John,  189. 
France,  24,  28,  136. 
French   Explorations,   24. 
Fremont,   Gen.,  40,   148. 
Free-State    Party,    89,    90,    92,    93, 

98,  101,  110,  117,  122. 
Free-State  Leaders,  Arrest  of,  94. 
Free  Silver,  254. 
Freedman's  Association,  204. 
Free  State  College,  107. 
Free  State  Prisoners,  95. 
Free  State  Hotel,  96,  153. 
Frontier  Guard,  144. 
Forces,  Consolidation 'of,  149. 
Forsythe,  Col.,  178. 
Fossil  Discovery,  221. 
Fort  Adams,  36. 
Fort  Aubrey,  46. 
Fort  Blair,  156. 
Fort  Blunt,  152. 
Fort  Dodge,  44,  181,  200. 
Fort  Ellsworth.   181. 
Fort  Gibson,  152,  157. 
Fort  Hayes,  178,   181. 
Fort  Kearney,  157. 
Fort  Larned,  176,  181. 
Fort    Leavenworth,    82,     130,    148, 

149,  165,  218. 
Fort  Orleans,  25,  26. 
Fort  Riley  Military  Road.  48. 
Fort  Riley,  64,  83.  95,  247. 
Fort    Scott,   48,    64.    116,    119,   147, 

148.  163,  211.  226. 
Fort  Sheridan.  178. 
Fort  Smith,  156. 
Fort  Wallace,  178.  181. 
Fugitive  Slave  Law,  69. 
Funston,   Fred,  258,   261,  263,  265, 

267,  268. 


Gale  Block,  141. 

Gano,  Gen.,  158. 

G.  A.  R.  Post,  211,  225,  288. 

Garfield,  204,  221. 

Garrison,  67,   73,  245. 

Gas  at  lola,  251. 

Gas  City,  252. 

Gage,  G.  G.,  253. 

Gallego,  Juan,  20. 

Geary's     Administration,      104-108, 

110. 
Germantown,  191. 
German  Baptist,  216. 
Gihon,  John  H.,  7. 
Girls'  Industrial  School,  225. 
Gladstone,  T.  H.,  7,  96,  302. 
Gljck,  G.  W.,  209. 
Click's  Administration,  210-214. 


IIVDEX. 


395 


Gold  Standard,  254. 

Goodland,  251. 

Goodin,  201. 

Goss,  Col.  U.  S.,  238. 

Governors  of  Kansas,  384. 

Grafton,  Edward,  278. 

Grant,    U.    S.,    113,    181,    187,    209, 

230. 
Graham  County,  205. 
Grauge,  186. 
Grand  Village,  59. 
Grasshopper  Invasion,  194-195. 
Gray,  Mrs.  Mary  F.,  273. 
Greer,  Samuel  W.,  145. 
Greer,   Mrs.   Clotilda  Hilton,   199. 
Great  Bend,  21,  45,  227. 
Great  Britain,  185. 
Greenback-Labor    Party,     196,    201, 

209,  212. 
Great  Salt  Lake  Trail,  48. 
Gregg,  7. 

Greely  County,  22. 
Griffith,  W.  K.,  124. 
Gunn,  L.  C,  243. 
Guthrie,  229. 


H 


Hairgrove,  William  and  Asa,  117. 
Hale,   Edward  Everett,  7,  205.  301. 
Hall,  Amos,  117. 
Hall,  Austin.  117. 
Hamilton,  Charles,  117. 
Hamilton  County,  221. 
Harris,  William  A.,  256,  285. 
Harbor  Convention,  228. 
Harrison,  Benjamin,  223. 
Harmony  Mission,  59. 
Harper's  Ferry,  133,   134. 
Harvey,    James    M.,    181,    196,    249, 

313. 
Harvey's  Administration,  183-189. 
Harvey,  Capt.,   105. 
Harvey  County-,  193. 
Haskell  Institute,  211. 
Havana,  258. 

Hayes,.  Rutherford  B.,  196,  209. 
Hayes,  Town  of,   272,  297. 
Herald  of  Freedom,  76,  77,  96,  106, 

301. 
Hiawatha,  289. 
Hickory  Point,  90,  105. 
Highest  Point  in  Kansas,  11. 
Highland   University,    115. 
History  of   Kansas,   7,  212. 
Historical    Society,    7,    19,    20,    38, 

61,    77.    131,    135,    136,    219,   266, 

278,   288,  304. 
Hoch,  Edward  W.,  280. 
Hocb's  Administration,  281-287. 


Hoch,  Miss  Anna,  282. 

Holland,  J.  G.,  Quoted,  67. 

Holliday,  Gen.,  159. 

HoUister's   Battery,  165. 

Homestead  Law,  168,  205. 

Homesteader,  263. 

Hopkins'  Battery,  165. 

Hopkins,  Maj.  Henry,  158. 

Hopoeithleyohola,  148. 

Horton,  Chief  .Justice,  244. 

Horner,  305. 

Howe,  E.  W.,  308. 

Hoyt,  Col.,  160. 

Hudson,  Gen.  .J.  K.,  260-261. 

Hugoton,  221. 

Humphrey,  223. 

Humphrey's     Administration,     224- 

240. 
Hunt,  .Josie,   305. 
Huntsman,  Private,  267. 
Hutchinson,  215,  227,  278,  294. 


latan,  144. 

Immigration,  106. 

Immigration,   Years   of   Great,    183- 

201. 
Inman,  Col.   Henry,   7,   46,   48,  304. 
Independence  Hall,  129. 
Industrial    Affairs,    129,    168,    225, 

227.  292. 
Industrial   Development,    Period   of, 

265-290. 
Industrial  Union.  234. 
Indians,  16,  20,  54. 
Indian  Country,  51-65. 
Indian  Raids,  175,  183,  228. 
Indian  Service  in  Civil  War,  148. 
Indian  Territory,  200. 
Introductory,  11. 
International  Encyclopedia,  198. 
Independence  Creek,  32,  59. 
Independence,  44,  160,  257. 
Infantry,  First,  Seventh  and  Eighth, 

149. 
Infantry,  Third  and  Fourth,  147. 
Infantry,  Third,  Fourth  and  Tenth, 

149. 
Ingalls,  John  J.,  124,  142.  188,  189, 

202,  215,  235,  247,  303,  309,  316. 
Invasion  of  March  30.  81-82, 
Invasion  of  2,700,  106. 
lola,  251,  257. 
Iowa,  51,  106. 
lowas,  25,  58,  62. 
Irrigation,  235,  250. 
Irving,  7. 
Irwin,  62. 
Isopete,  20. 


396 


INDEX. 


Jackson,  Attorney-Generdl,  286. 

Jefferson,  28,  31,  67. 

Jefferson  City,  159. 

Jarmarillo,  20. 

Jayhawker,  The,  116,  117. 

Jennison,  Col.,  147. 

Jennison,  Dr.  Charles  R.,  117. 

Jesuits,  59. 

Jewell  County,  293. 

Johnson,  Elizabeth,  40. 

Johnson,  Col.,   102,   147. 

Johnson,  Rev.,  137. 

Johnson,  Associate  Justice,  244. 

Jones,  J.  T.,  "Tawa,"  61. 

Jones,    Sheriff,    90,    91,    92,   93,    96, 

106,   111,  284. 
Judson,   148. 
Junction  City,  206. 
Juvenile  Court,  282. 


K 


Kansas,  The   Name,  55. 

Kansas,  Organized  as  Territory,  69. 

Kansas  Free  State,  96. 

Kansas,  Admission  of,  124,  127. 

Kansas-Nebraska  Act,  66.  67-70,  71, 
72,  79,  80,  82,  88,  125,  205,  206, 
279. 

Kansas  Building,  245. 

Kansas  Brigade,  148. 

Kansas  Conflict,  7,  92. 

Kansas  Day,  206,  256,  280. 

Kansas  Emigrant,   Song  of,  77. 

Kansas  History,  275. 

Kansas  Historical  Society.  See  His- 
torical Collection. 

Kansas  Herald,  91. 

Kansas,  Its  Interior  and  Exterior 
Life,  7,  102. 

Kansas  Literature.  300. 

Kansas  Magazine,  302. 

Kansas  Patriotism,  143,  258. 

Kansas   Spring,   7. 

Kansas  Troops  in  Indian  Territory, 
152. 

Kansas  University.  See  State  Uni- 
versity. 

Kansas  Volunteers,  144,  147,  164. 

Kansas  City,  11,  32,  44,  51,  95,  278. 

Kansas  City  Journal,  228. 

Kansas  Pacific,  169,  185,  193. 

Kansas  River,   11.  21,  25,  32,  48. 

Kansas  Indians,  278. 

Kanorado,  11. 

Kanzas,  25,  54,  57,  58,  71. 

Kaskaskias,  58. 

Kaw  Reservation,  209, 

Kickapoos,  58. 


Kingman,  227. 
Kingman,  Samuel  R.,  316. 
Kiowas,  175,  177. 
Kindergarten,    Free,    285. 
Knights  of  Labor,  234. 
K.  T.  Did,  306. 


Labor  Commission,  215. 

Labor  Party,  186. 

Labor  Bureau,  215. 

Labor  Day,  236. 

La  Harpe,  252. 

Lake  Sibley,  175. 

Lane,  James  H.,  89,  91,  92,  93,  100, 

101,  142,  145,  148,  154,  160,  181, 

250,  310. 
Lane's  Army,  102. 
Lane's  Brigade,  147. 
Lane  County,  247. 
Lane  Succession,  388. 
Lansing,  151. 
Larned,  38,  46. 
Larned's  History,  7. 
Lawrence,    41,    74.    75,    76.    79,    91, 

92,    96,    100,    106.    107.    112,    116, 

122,  133,  138,  139,  143,  1.52,  198, 

199,  201,  205,  211,  253,  278,  262, 

301. 
Lawrence,  Siege  of,  99. 
Lawrence,  Invasion  of  2,700,  105. 
Lawrence,  Sack  of,  126. 
Lawrence,    Amos   A.,    73,    107,    151, 

217. 
Lawrence   Republican,    134. 
Lawrence     University.      See     State 

University,  21. 
Leedy.  John  W.,  254. 
Leedy's   Administration,    256-264. 
Lee,  Albert  L.,  165. 
Leavenworth,  Fort,  64,  79. 
Leavenworth  Constitution,  113. 
Leavenworth  Herald.  75. 
Leavenworth,  Col.  Henry,  64. 
Leavenworth.    48,    75,    89,    92,    104, 

105,  125,  144,  146,  149,  172,  198, 

211. 
Leavenworth,  Mob  at,  101. 
Leavenworth,  Lawrence  and  Galves- 
ton Railroad,  208. 
Lecompte,  Samuel  D.,  80,  94. 
Lecompton,  91.  94,  95,  96,  101,  105, 

112.  122,  126,  127,  134. 
Lecompton  Const.   Convention,   110, 

111. 
Lecompton    Constitution,    112,    119, 

138. 
Legislature,   Topeka,  93. 
Legislatures,  Territorial,  138. 
Legislature  1861,  141-142. 


INDEX. 


397 


Leigslature  1863.  151. 
Legislature  18(j4,  151-152. 
Legislature  1865,  172. 
Legislature  1869,  183. 
Legislature  1873,  189. 
Legislature  1874,  196. 
Legislature  1877,  198. 
Legislature  1879,  202. 
Legislature  1881,  203. 
Legislature  1883,  210. 
Legislature  1885,  215. 
Legislature  1889,  224. 
Legislature  1891,  235-36. 
Legislature  1893,  241. 
Legislature  1895,  250. 
Legislature  1897,  256. 
Legislature  1899,  265. 
Legislature  1901,  272. 
Legislature  1903,  275. 
Legislature  1905,  281. 
Legislature  1907,  285. 
Legislature  1909,  288. 
Legislature,    Special    Sessions,    264, 

286. 
Legislative  War,   241-245. 
Legislature,    Topeka.      See    Topeka 

Legislature. 
Le  Marais  du  Cygnes-Wtiittier,  117. 
Le    Marais    des    Cygnes    Massacre, 

116. 
Lewelling,   Lorenzo   D.,   240,   316. 
Lewelling's      Administration,      241- 

249. 
Lewis,    Capt.    Merriwetlier,    31. 
Lewis,    ^ym.    H.,    200. 
Lewis  &  Clark  Expedition.  31-32. 
Liberator,  The,  134. 
Libraries,   272.  298. 
Lieutenant     Governors    of     Kansas, 

384. 
Limitation    of     Settlement    Theory, 

51. 
Lincoln,    Abraham.    114.    125,    126, 

129,   145,   165,  168,  170. 
Lincoln's   Call   for   Volunteers,   143. 
Lincoln  Day,  285,  288. 
Lindsborg.  21. 
Lindsay.   Col.   H.  C,  261. 
Lines,   C.    B..    102. 
Linn  County.  33,  64,  117,   163. 
Little  Col.,  261. 
Little  Blue,  Battle  of.   160. 
Little  Osage.  148,  163. 
Literature,   Kansas,    7,    12,   300. 
Livestock,  28. 
Livingston,   28. 
Local  Histories,  304. 
Locomotive.  First,  185. 
Long,  Chester  I..  275.   286. 
Long,    Stephen   H.,   40. 
Louis   XIV,    24. 


Lcuisiana  Territory,  24. 
Louisiana   Purchase,   27,    28. 
Louisiana,  51,  66,  67,  204. 
Louisiana  Purchase  Exposition,  272, 

279-280. 
Lovejoy,   67. 
Lowell   Quoted,  67,   206. 
Lowest  Point  in  Kansas,  11. 
Lutheran,   216. 
Lyons,  Gen.  Nathaniel,  146,  227. 

M 

Macabee  Farm,  161. 

MacArthur,    Gen.,    266. 

Machine,  280. 

Maine,   Destruction   of,   258-9. 

Malgares,  Lieut.,  35,  38. 

Manahan,    Reseil,    267. 

Manhattan,   76,   189,   200. 

Manila,  258,  263,  265. 

Mantanzas,  259. 

Manual   Training.   275. 

Manufactures,  295. 

Man  Without  a  Country,  206. 

Martin,  John  A.,  122,  124,  196,  212, 

227,   230,   242,   2.50,  317. 
Martin's   Administration,   215-223. 
Martin,  Geo.  W.,  166. 
Marais   des    Cygnes   Massacre,    117, 

134. 
Marble  in  Memory,  284. 
Marion  County,  193. 
Marshall  County,  48. 
Marmaduke,   General,    158. 
Martyr,  Father  Padilla,  22. 
Massachusetts,  73,  134. 
Matagorda  Bay,  16. 
McCoy,  Isaac,  55,  61,  302. 
McCoy,  Joseph,  184. 
McCarter,   Margaret   Hill,    7. 
McDowell's  Creek.  21. 
McDowell,   Wm.   C,   124. 
McGhee  County,   110. 
McPherson,  216,  227. 
McPherson  County,  48. 
McTaggart,   Capt.   Wm.,   266. 
McKinley,  Wm.,  254,  263,  270,  272. 
M.  de  Bienville,  24. 
Metcalf,  Gen.  W.  S.,  268. 
Medary,  Governor.  121,  126,  127. 
Medicine  Lodge,  226.  ' 

Meeker,  .Jothan,  61. 
Mendoza,  18. 

Mennonites,  191.  193.  216. 
Methodist.  60,  114,  216. 
Mexico,   18.   43,  48,  220. 
Miamis,  58. 
Midland  College,  208. 
Miller,  Sol,  77. 
Mineral  Wealth,  259,  294. 


398 


INDEX. 


Mine  Creek,  163. 

Minneola,  113,  114. 

Mississippi    River,    11,    21,    24,    28, 

50,   204. 
Misbouri,    33,    51,    58,    G6,    72,    80, 

81,  110. 
Missouri    Compromise,    66,    67,    68, 

69,   71. 
Missouri,  Kansas  Troops  in,  146. 
Missouri  Indians,  25. 
Missouri   River,   25,   31,   33,   50,   51. 
Missions,  59. 
Missionaries,   22. 
Missouri  Pacific  R.  R.,  217. 
Mitchel,  Robt.  B.,  146-7. 
Mitchel,  D.  P.,  201. 
Mullican,    Col.,    148. 
Mo.,  Kans.  &  Tex.  R.  R.,  169. 
Monuments,  39,   253. 
Monalian,  Deane,  303. 
Monroe,  James,  29. 
Montgomery,  Col.,  117,  149, 
Montgomery  County,  11. 
Moonlight,   Col.,   62,   160,   163,   218. 
Morgan  Raid,  165. 
Morris  County,  204. 
Mortgage  Law,  224,  234. 
Moore,  Col.,  175. 
Morrill,  Edmund  H.,  168,  254.  289, 

318. 
Morrill's  Administration,  250-255. 
Morris   County,   204. 
Morse,  G.  C,  155. 
Moore,  Col.,  175. 
Moscoso,   21. 
Mounds,  The,   163. 
Mound  Builders,  43. 
Mt.  Oread,  107,   129. 
Mountains,  Mexican,  37. 
Mountains,  Wind  River,  41. 
Municipal    Suffrage   Bill,   219. 
Mutual   Benefit  Association,  234. 
Muncies,  58. 
Murphy,  Francis,  198. 

N 

Name,  Kansas,  71. 

Napoleon,  28. 

Narvaez,   Expedition  of,   18. 

Narrative  of  Struggle,  101. 

Natural   Kansas,   11,   12. 

Natchitoches.  38. 

National  Cemetery,  218. 

National    Educational     Association, 

216. 
Nebraska,  106,  123. 
Nemaha  County,   48. 
Ncodesha,  248.  251,  257. 
Neosho,  44,  59. 
Nt;osho  River,  33. 


Nevada,  211. 

New  Basle,  252. 

New  England,  76. 

New  England  Emigrant  Aid  Soci- 
ety, 73-74. 

New  Mexico,  17,  19,  22. 

New  Orleans,  28,  218. 

Newspapers,  61,  75,  89,  186,  205, 
300. 

Newton,  184,  216,  252. 

Newtonia,   163. 

New  York  Tribune,  74. 

Niobrara,  222. 

Nicodemus,   Town   of,  205. 

Niehaus,   Charles   Henry,   188, 

Nichols,  Mrs.  C.  I.,  125. 

Northrup,   Mrs.   Margaret,   219. 

Normal  High  School  Law,  288. 

Normal  State — See  State  Normal, 

Non-Intercourse  Rule,  43. 

Nova  Albion,  19. 

Nute,  Rev.  Ephriam,  107. 


Oak  Hill.  155. 

Oak  Council,  44. 

Ohio,   58,  88,   122. 

Oil  Discoveries,  257,  281. 

Oklahoma,  210,  228-230, 

Olathe,   159. 

Old   Sacremento,   129, 

Old  Castle,  Baker,  114. 

Onate,   22,   23. 

Opportunity,  309. 

Original  Package  Case,  231. 

Ornithological   Collection,   239. 

Organic  Act.  66. 

Oregon   Trail.    48. 

Oregon   Country,   41. 

Osawatomie,   76,   98,   100,   133,   134, 

135,   151. 
Osborn's  Administration,  189-196. 
Osborn,  Thomas  A.,   186,  314. 
Osage  Ceded  Lands,  208. 
Osage   Indians,    25,   33,   44,   54,   57, 

59,   60,   176,   208. 
Osage   Mission,   59-60. 
Osceolo,  148. 
Ottawas,  58.  60-61. 
Ottawa.   225,   278. 
Otoe  Indians,  25. 
Overmeyer.    David,  249,   280, 
Oxford.   110. 


Pacific   Ocean,    32,   50. 
Padoucas,  25,  26,  54. 
Paine,  Albert  Bigelow,  308. 
Palmyra,  98. 


INDEX. 


399 


Paola,  149,  257. 

Parallels,    John    Brown's,    134,    135. 

Parker,   7. 

Paris   Exposition,   228. 

Parrot,   Marcus,   111,    145. 

Parsons,  204,  208,  209,  217,  218. 

Papt,  Capt.   H.  Clay,  98,  134. 

Patrick,  Ross,  117. 

Patrons  of  Husbandry,  234. 

Paulson,    John,    196. 

Pawnees,  21,  35,  46,   54,  137. 

Pawnee  Republic,  33,  35. 

Pawnee  Rock,  45. 

Pawnee,  Town  of,  82,  83. 

Payne,   Capt.,   210,   211. 

Peck,   Geo.    R.,   230. 

Peffer,   Wm.   A..   235. 

Penitentiary,    State,   151,   203. 

Peoples'  Party,  232,  234,  235,  240, 

254. 
Peorias,   58. 

Perkins,   Bishop  W.,  239. 
Period  of  Exploration,  14. 
Peru,    18,    281.   . 
Phllipps,  Wendall,  67,  245. 
Phillips,    W.    A.,    7,    18,    101,    148, 

149,   152,  302. 
Phillips,   H.   L.,   212. 
Philanthropy,   Kansas,   211. 
Philippine  War,  265-270.      , 
Physiology  and   Hygiene,  215. 
Piankeshaws,   58. 
Pickering,   I.   O.,  240,   249. 
Pierce,  72,  79,   80,  90,  95,  99,   100, 

101,   105. 
Pike's  Expedition,  32-38. 
Pike  Monument,  40. 
Pike,  Zebulon,  33. 

Pike,   Zebulon   Montgomery,  43,   51. 
Pike  Centennial,   284-5. 
Pilot  Knob,  158. 
Pioneer,  207. 
Pioneer  Day,  279. 
Pipe  Lines  Common  Carriers,  281. 
Pittsburg,  297. 
Pixley,  59. 

Platte,  Purchase,  51,  66. 
Plains,  Great,  40. 
Pleasonton,  Gen.  Alfred,  159,  162. 
Plumb,    Preston    B.,    210,    224,    226, 

228,  239,  313. 
Poetry  of  Kansas,  305. 
Political  Changes,  223-265. 
Pomeroy,    Samuel   C,    76,   130,   131, 

142,    181,    312. 
Pomeroy  Succession,  388. 
Pony   Express,   129. 
Pope.   200. 
I'opulation,   72. 
Populist    House,    241-244. 
Populist  Party — See  Peoples'  Party. 


Pottawatomies,  33,  58,  98,  133,  134. 

I'owell,  Clayton,  166. 

Prairie  Grove,  149. 

I'reface,  5. 

Prentis,   Caroline,  3,   7. 

Prentis,   Noble   L.,   50,  208,   315. 

Preston,  Col.,  95. 

Presbyterians,   59,   216. 

Price,  Gen.  Sterling,  147,  148,  175. 

Price  Raid,  156-163. 

Primary   Election   Law,   286. 

Prohibition  Amendment,   203. 

Prohibition,     218,     231,     232,     252, 

286,   288. 
Prohibition  Movement,  202. 
Prohibition    Party,    223,    235,    240, 

249. 
Pro-Slavery  Associations,  74. 
Prosperity,  271. 
Pueblo,  19. 
Puncah  River,  52. 
Psalm,  91st,  267. 


Quayle,  W.  A.,  51. 

Quantrill's   Raid,   152,   156,   253. 

Quantrill,   284. 

Quivira,  14,  19,  20,  21,  22,  44. 


Race,   Henrietta  B.,   3. 

Railways  in  Kansas,   185. 

Railroad    Strike,   217. 

Railroad   Commissioners,   252. 

Railroad   Grants,    Result   of,    170, 

Railroads,   264. 

Rains.   Gen.,   147. 

Rankin,   J.   R. 

Readers,   13. 

Realf,  Richard,  305.       , 

Records  of  the  State,  166. 

Redpath,   James,   102. 

Red  River,   35,   52. 

Reeders'   Administration,   79-87. 

Reeder,  Andrew  H.,  89,  94,  95,  137. 

Reed,  B.  L.,  117. 

Regiments,    Additional    Raised,   147. 

Reid,  Gen.  J.  W.,  100,  106. 

Reign  of  Terror,  97. 

Religion  of  Indians,  56. 

Removal  Policy,  57. 

Relief   Committee,   194,   195. 

Reno  County,   193. 

Republican     Party,     69,     122,     196, 

201,  212,  223,  240,  264,  280. 
Republic  County,  40,  175. 
Republic  City,  35,  285. 
Republican  House,  241. 
Rescue  of  Kansas  from  Slavery,  7. 


400 


INDEX. 


Review  of  the  Situation,  66. 

Richardson,   Gen.,  91,   223,   235. 

Rich,  Ben  C,   243. 

Richie  Block,  141. 

Richey,  W.   E.,  20. 

Rifle   Christians,   102. 

Riley,  Fort,  21. 

Riley,  Gen.  Bennett,  64. 

Riley  County,   151,   186. 

Rio  Grande,  18,  19,  20. 

Rio  Grande  in  Philippines,  266-7. 

Rio  Pecos,  20. 

Rio   Sonora,   19. 

Robinson,    Charles,    7,    75,    76,    88, 

91,    92,    93,    94,   95,    96,    97,    101, 

107,  126,  139,  141,  144,  209,  234, 

249,  284,   302,   311. 
Robinson,    Mrs.    Sara    T.    D.    L.,    7, 

76,  94,  95,   102,  302. 
Robinson,  Michael,  117. 
Rocky  Mountains,   11,  24,   221. 
Roman  Nose,   179. 
Rome,   220. 
Rooks  County,  222. 
Root,  Lieut.  Gov.,  141. 
Rosecrans,  Gen.,   158,  159. 
Ross,  Edmund,  124,  181. 
Roosevelt,  Theodore,   271,   277,  279. 
Root,   Secretary  of  War,  267,  8. 
Rusk,  Jeremiah  M.,  226. 
Russia,   185,   191,  193,   238. 
Ryan,    Congressman,    209. 


Sacs  and  Foxes,  51,  58. 

Salina  Wesleyan,  216. 

Salina,   35,   216. 

Salt  Industry,  226. 

Salter,  Mrs.  Medora,  219. 

San  Francisco,  261. 

Santa  Fe,  16,  42,  43,  44. 

Santa  Fe  Trail,  41,  42-48,  282,  283, 

285. 
Santa     Fe     Land    Sale    Completed, 

231. 
San  Miguel,  42. 
Santiago,   262. 
Sappa,  200. 
San   Luis,   263. 
Saunders'   Fort,  99,  100. 
Saxon,  15. 
Say,   Thomas,   40. 

School    District   Consolidation,    272. 
School  House,   Sod,   173. 
Schoolmaster,   First,   155. 
Schmidt,  C.  B.,  191. 
Scientific   Research,    40. 
Scotch    Colony,    186. 
Seal  of  State,  142. 
Second  Kansas  Cavalry,  165. 


Second  Kansas,  161,  163. 
Second  Kansas  Militia,  253. 
Secretaries  of  State,  384. 
Secretary  of  Agriculture,  226. 
Sedan,  248. 

Sedgwick  County  Farmers,  211. 
Seed  Grain  Distributed,  236. 
Seward,  William  H.,   127. 
Seventh  Cavalry,  164. 
Sergeant-at-Arms,  243. 
Shannon's   Administration,   88-103. 
Shannon,  W.  T.,  104,  137. 
Shannon,  W.,  7,  104,  137. 
Sharp's  Rifles,  82. 
Shawnees,  56,  58,  60. 
Shawnee  Mission,  82,  84,  90,  137. 
Shawnee  County,  72,  161,  253. 
Shawnee  Manual  Labor  School,  82. 
Shawnee  Legislature,  98,  99. 
Shelby,   Gen.,  158. 
Sheldon,  Charles  M.,  308. 
Sherman  County,  11,  251. 
Sherman,    William,    98,    175,     176, 

178,  209. 
Sherman,  John,   29. 
Sheridan,  95,  177. 
SherifC  Jones.     See  Jones,  SherifiE. 
Shoshoni,  56. 
Sibley,  Maj.,  44. 
Single  Tax  Clubs,  234. 
Sioux,  176. 

Slavery,  Growth  of,  66-67. 
Sledge   Hammer,   243. 
Slough  Creek,  105. 
Slough,   John  P.,   124. 
Smith,  A.  W.,  240. 
SmitJi,  Buckingham,  17. 
Smith,  Gen.,   162. 
Smith,  Mrs.  M.  B.,  199. 
Smith,  Pcrsifer  L,  99. 
Smoky  Hill,  21,  221,  247. 
Snow,    Chancellor,   221,    231,   236-7, 

269,  317. 
Snyder,  Asa,  117. 
Social  Science  Club,  273. 
Soldiers'  Census,  218. 
Soldiers'  Home-Coming,  172,  263., 
Soldiers'   National   liome,   211,   225. 
Soldiers'  Orphan  Home,  215. 
Solomon  Valley,  175. 
Sons  of  the  Revolution,  257. 
South  Carolina,  95,  149. 
Southwestern  College,  216. 
Spain,  28,  42,  258,  265. 
Spaniards,   16,  24,  238. 
Spanish  -American  War,  258-264. 
Spanish-American    War,    Treaty    of 

Peace,  263. 
Spanish  Exploration,  16-23. 
Spanish  Settlements,  17. 
Spanish  Troops,  31. 


INDEX. 


401 


Speer,  Mr.,  154. 

Spooner,  William  B.,  245. 

Spring,   7,   97. 

Sipriug,  The  John  Brown,  282. 

Standard  Oil  Co.,  281. 

Stanley,  Henry  M.,  7. 

Stanley.'s  Administration,   265-274. 

Stanley,  William  E.,  264. 

Stanton,    Frederick,   108,    109,    110, 

111,  112. 
Stand,  Watie,  Gen.,  152. 
Stars  and  Stripes  Unfurled,  35. 
State  Aid,  252. 
State   Construction,   141-182. 
State  Flower,  207. 
Statehood,  Period  of,  141-291. 
State    House,    183,    202,    223,    236, 

239,  265. 
State  Institutions,  215,  298-9. 
State  Primary,  First,  286. 
State  Printing  Plant,  282. 
State  Printers,  389. 
State  Row,  183. 
State  Senators,  233. 
State  Temperance  Union,  286. 
State     University,     129,     151,     189, 

203,  217,  222,  236,  237.  245,  246, 

258,  260,  266,  275,  284,  297,  305. 
State    Normal,    151,    189,    200,   203, 

252,  260,  270,  297,  307. 
State     Agricultural     College,      101, 

189,  192,  203,  297. 
St.  .John's  College,  216. 
State  Depository,  282. 
State    Imbecile    Asylum,    151,    189, 

265. 
State  Library,  272. 
State  Reform  School,  202. 
State  Reformatory,   215. 
State  Oil  Refinery,  281. 
State  Penitentiary,  281. 
Statuary   Hall,  250. 
Stephens  County,  221. 
Sterling,  216,  225,  227. 
Sternberg,  C.  H.,  247. 
Stilwell,   William,   117. 
Stilwell,  Jack,  179,  180. 
St.  John's  Administration,  202-208. 
St.  John,  John  P.,  199. 
St.  Louis,   29,  31,  32,  38,  158,  280. 
St.  Anne,  25. 

St.  Peters  and  St.  Paul's  Day,  21. 
St.  Mary's,  62. 
Stoddard,  25. 
Struggle  in  Kansas,  79-87. 
Strip,  The,  229. 
Strickler,  Gen.,  91. 
Stringfellow,  72,  81. 
Stubbs,  W.  R.,  286. 
Stubbs'  Administration,  288-291. 
Sturdevant,  Mrs.  Sarah,  38. 


Squatter  Associations,  74. 
Squatter  Sovereignty,  68. 
Subterranean  River,  251. 
Sugar  Bounty,  226. 
Sugar  Beet  Bounty,  226. 
Sugar  Manufactories,  225. 
Sully,  Gen.,  177. 
Sumner,  Charles,  68. 
Sumner,  Col.,  92,  98,  99. 
Sunflower,  45,  207,  275,  305. 
Supreme  Court,  230,  232,  244. 
Superintendents   of   Public   Instruc- 
tion, 386. 
Swedish  Colony,  186. 
Swensson,   Carl   A.,   317. 
Sword,  Old  Spanish,  20. 
Sykes,  Maj.-Gen.,  157,  159. 


Taft,  Lorado,  236. 

Taft,  William  H.,  279,  286. 

Tallerand,  29. 

Tartary,  19. 

Taxation,  234. 

Tax  Law  of  1907,  285. 

Teachers'  Institutes,  198. 

Teachers'  Examinations,  215. 

Te  Deum,  26. 

Temperance,  202. 

Temperance  Movement,  198. 

Temperance  Society,  State,  198. 

Temperance  Union,  199. 

Temperance  Camp  Meeting,  199. 

Tennessee,  204. 

Tennessee  Town,  205. 

Tenth  Kansas.  158,  165,  261. 

Territorial   Judiciary,   94. 

Territorial  Government,   185. 

Territorial  Governor,  First,  79. 

Territorial  Period,  66. 

Territorial  Legislatures,  81,   90,  94, 

110,  112,  121,  126. 
Territorial  Militia,  105. 
Territorial  Officers,  382. 
Texas,  16,  67,  184,  204,  218,  228. 
Texas  Cavalry,  148. 
Text  Book  Law.  256. 
Text  Book  Commission,  256. 
Thatcher,  Salon  O.,  124,  IVO. 
Thanksgiving  Day,  106. 
Thayer,   Eli,  73,  81,  201,  248. 
Tignex,  19. 
Tisne,  M.  du,  24, 
Titus,  Fort,  99,  100. 
Titus,  Col.,  180. 
Topeka,  41,  75,  123,   143,   198,  201, 

205,  228,  252,  254,  260,  261. 
Topeka,  Capital,  319. 
I'opcka    Movement.    88,    89,    93,    99, 

113,  138.  277,  278. 


402 


INDEX. 


Topeka   Constitution,    89,    98,    139, 

254. 
Topeka    Legislature,    98,    99,    107, 

113,  126,  139. 
Topeka  Higli  Sctiool,  267. 
Toronto,  39. 

Towns  Founded,  First,  75. 
Traders,  Indian,  52. 
Trading  Posts,  41,  64,  117,  163. 
Trail,  Tiie  First,  42. 
Trail,  Santa  Fe,  42,  48. 
Trail,  Oregon,  48. 
Trails,  Famous,  42. 
Treasurers  of  State,  385. 
Treaty,  Secret,  28,  29. 
Treaty,  Louisiana,  29. 
Treaty  of  1^67,  176. 
Trembly,  Private,  267. 
Tribune,  221. 
Troy,  125. 
Truancy  Law,  275. 
Trudeau,  James,  179,  180. 
Tusk,  20. 
Turkey  Creek,  48. 
Twentieth    Kansas,    261,    263,    265, 

266,  267,  268. 
Twenty-first  Kansas,  261,  262,  263. 
Twenty-second    Kansas,     261,    262, 

263. 
Twenty-third  Kansas,  262,  263. 
Two-Cent  Fare  Law,  285. 


U 


TJdden,  J.  A.,  20. 

TTnited  States  Circiiit  Court,  208. 

United   States   Supreme  Court,   208. 

iTTnited  States  Senators,  299. 

United    States    Bureau    of   Ethnolo- 
gy, 7,  22. 

United   States   Institutions,   299. 

Union  Labor,  223. 

Union  Pacific  Railroad,  170,  185. 

Union  Pacific  Railroad  Grant,  109. 

United  Presbyterians,  216. 
JJniform  Freight  Rates,  282. 
'Uniontown,  72. 

University,  State,  Instituted,  106. 

Updegraff,   W.   W.,   141. 


Veal,  Col.,  161. 
Viceroy  of  Mexico,  18. 
Vicksburg,   164. 
Vigilencia,  262. 
Virginia,  134,  135,  211. 
Virginians,  31. 
Villazur,  24. 
Village  des  Causez,  59. 


Violence,  Reign  of,  88-120. 

W 

Wabaunsee,  76,  102. 

Wabaunsee  County,  21. 

Wabash  Valley,  58. 

Wagstaff,  W.  R.,  150. 

Wakarusa  War.  80,  90,  93,  96,  133. 

Walker,  Capt.  Sam,  144. 

Walch,  Hugh  S.,  116,  120. 

Walker,   Sam,  100. 

Walker,   Gov.  R.   J.,   108,   109,  111, 

114. 
Walker,  T.  H.,  187. 
Walls  of  Corn,  213,  305. 
War  in  Kansas,  145. 
War  with  Great  Britain,  38. 
War,  French  and  Indian,  28. 
Ware,  Eugene  F.,  7,  15,  135,  305. 
Ware,   David,  223. 
Way,   Amanda,   199. 
Washington,  105,  210,  262. 
Washington,  City  of,  188. 
Washington,  County  of,  48. 
Weas,  58. 
Weather,  252. 
Wells,  Fargo  Express,  130. 
Welsh   Colony,    186. 
Wellington,  226. 
Wellington,  City  of,  211. 
Westport,  44,  82,  88.  161,  162. 
Western  Branch  State  Normal,  272. 
Western  Engineer,  40. 
Wheat,   257,   292. 
Whig  Party,  69. 
White,  Private,  267. 
White,  Marten,  100. 
White,   William  Allen,   7,  308. 
White  Rock  Creek,  175. 
Whitfield,  .John  W.,  80,  89,  98,  106. 
Whittler,    J.    G.,    67,    77,    93,    118, 

206. 
Weer,  Col.,  149. 
Wichita,  184.  206,  211,  220. 
Wilder,   D.  W.,  7,  207,  245. 
Wilder,  A.  C,  145,  149. 
Wild  Bill,  184. 
Wilder's  Annals,  216. 
Wilkinson,  Sheriff,  243. 
Wilkinson,  Allen,  98. 
Wilkinson,  Lieut.,   36. 
Willard,  Frances,  199. 
Willey,   Private,   267. 
Williams,  James  M.,  152. 
Williams,   May,    158. 
Willitts,  J.  F.,  235. 
Wilson  County,  248. 
Wilson   Bill,   232. 

Wilson's  Creek,  Battle  of,  146,  147. 
Wiuchell,  .Tames  M.,  122. 


INDEX. 


403 


Winfield,  203,  215,  278. 

Winslow's  Brigade,  162. 

Wisconsin   Battery,   162. 

Woman's  Day,  279. 

Woman's  Suffrage,   212,   249. 

Woman's  Christian  Temperance  So- 
ciety, 199. 

Woman's  Christian  Temperance 
Union,  199,  225,  286. 

Woodson,  Daniel,  79,  84,  99,  100. 

Wooasdale,  221. 


Wyandotte,   204,   217. 

Wyandottes,  58. 

Wyandotte    Constitvitional    Conven- 
tion.  122-125,    138,   206,  230. 

Wyandotte     Constitution,     122-125, 
127. 

Y 

Yale  University,  222. 

Year  1894,  248. 

Y.  M.  C.  A.,  National,  277. 


